G. Medicare Shared Savings Program

1. Executive Summary and Background

a. Purpose

As of January 1, 2022, over 11 million people with Medicare receive care from one of the 528,966 health care providers in the 483 accountable care organizations (ACOs) participating in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Shared Savings Program), the largest value-based purchasing program in the country. 229 Eligible groups of providers and suppliers, including physicians, hospitals, and other healthcare providers, may participate in the Shared Savings Program by forming or joining an ACO and in so doing agree to become accountable for the total cost and quality of care provided under Traditional Medicare to an assigned population of Medicare fee-for-service (FFS) beneficiaries. Under the Shared Savings Program, providers and suppliers that participate in an ACO continue to receive traditional Medicare FFS payments under Parts A and B, and the ACO may be eligible to receive a shared savings payment if it meets specified quality and savings requirements, and in some instances may be required to share in losses if it increases health care spending. To advance Medicare's value-based care strategy of growth, alignment, and equity, we proposed changes to the Shared Savings Program as described in section III.G. of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46093 through 46218) and sought public comments which we summarize and respond to in this section of this final rule.

229 Refer to CMS, Shared Savings Program Fast Facts—As of January 1, 2022, available at https://www.cms.gov/sites/default/files/2022-01/2022_Shared_Savings_Program_Fast_Facts.pdf .

The Shared Savings Program offers different participation options (tracks) that allow ACOs to assume various levels of risk. The BASIC track offers a glide path for eligible ACOs to transition from a one-sided shared savings-only model to progressively higher increments of financial risk and potential reward under two-sided shared savings and shared losses models 230 within a single 5-year agreement period. 231 ACOs that enter the ENHANCED track accept greater financial risk for their assigned beneficiaries in exchange for potentially higher financial rewards. For the performance year (PY) beginning on January 1, 2022, 59 percent of Shared Savings Program ACOs are under two-sided models. Historically, we have observed that ACOs in performance- based risk tracks have better financial performance than ACOs in shared savings only tracks and that low revenue ACOs (which may tend to be small, physician only ACOs) have better financial performance than high revenue ACOs (whose composition likely includes institutional providers, particularly hospitals and health systems). 232 We have also observed that the highest earning ACOs had a higher proportion of beneficiaries that were members of racial and ethnic minority communities and included a greater proportion of ESRD, disabled, and aged/dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries than the lowest earning ACOs.

230 As explained in earlier rulemaking, we have tended to use the terms “two-sided model” and “performance-based risk” interchangeably, considering them to be synonymous when describing payment models offered under the Shared Savings Program and Medicare ACO initiatives more broadly (83 FR 67827).

231 As explained in earlier rulemaking (for example, 83 FR 67844), the BASIC track's glide path includes 5 levels: a one-sided model available only for the first 2 consecutive performance years of a 5-year agreement period, each year of which is identified as a separate level (Levels A and B); and three levels of progressively higher risk and potential reward in performance years 3 through 5 of the agreement period (Levels C, D, and E).

232 See for example, 83 FR 67820.

As we explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46093), we proposed changes seeking to reverse certain recent trends 233 234 in the Shared Savings Program: in recent years growth in the number of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs has plateaued; higher spending populations are increasingly underrepresented in the program since the change to regionally-adjusted benchmarks; and access to ACOs appears inequitable as shown by data indicating that Black (or African American), Hispanic, Asian/Pacific Islander, and American Indian/Alaska Native beneficiaries are less likely to be assigned to a Shared Savings Program ACO than their Non-Hispanic White counterparts.

233 Refer to CMS, Shared Savings Program Fast Facts—As of January 1, 2022, available at https://www.cms.gov/sites/default/files/2022-01/2022_Shared_Savings_Program_Fast_Facts.pdf . 234 Refer to the “Performance Year Financial and Quality Results” Public Use Files available at https://data.cms.gov/medicare-shared-savings-program/performance-year-financial-and-quality-results .

Several of the proposals we included in the proposed rule were expected to advance equity within the Shared Savings Program. Based on feedback from health care providers treating underserved populations that they require upfront capital to make the necessary investments to succeed in accountable care and may also need additional time under a one-sided model before transitioning to performance-based risk, we proposed to provide advance shared savings payments to low revenue ACOs that are inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, that are new to the Shared Savings Program (that is, not a renewing ACO or a re-entering ACO), and that serve underserved populations. As proposed, these advance investment payments (AIPs) would increase when more beneficiaries who are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid or who live in areas with high deprivation (measured by the area deprivation index (ADI)), or both, are assigned to the ACO. Subject to certain limitations, these funds would be available to address the social needs of people with Medicare, as well as health care provider staffing and infrastructure. We also proposed other modifications to certain existing policies under the Shared Savings Program to support organizations new to accountable care by providing greater flexibility in the progression to performance-based risk, allowing these organizations more time to redesign their care processes to be successful under risk arrangements. We also proposed a health equity adjustment that would upwardly adjust ACOs' quality performance scores to continue encouraging high ACO quality performance, transition ACOs to all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and support those ACOs serving a high proportion of underserved beneficiaries while also encouraging all ACOs to treat underserved populations. Finally, we proposed certain changes to our benchmarking methodologies designed to encourage participation by health care providers who care for populations that include a high percentage of beneficiaries with high clinical risk factors and beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

Many of the proposals outlined in the proposed rule were the result of our efforts to align policies under the Shared Savings Program and under the Innovation Center's ACO models. For example, as proposed (87 FR 46098 through 46110), the AIPs were derived from learnings from the ACO Investment Model (AIM), an Innovation Center model that tested the effects of making advanced payments to certain ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program. We proposed to incorporate AIPs into the Shared Savings Program payment methodology as an example of how our larger ACO strategy of having the Innovation Center test new payment and service delivery models on the Shared Savings Program “chassis” can better harmonize policies across Medicare ACO initiatives and enable us to scale any findings.

We explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule that the Innovation Center had recently announced the elimination of the ACO Track of the Community Health and Rural Transformation (CHART) Model, which would have provided advance shared savings payments to new rural ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program, similar to AIM. Therefore, we believed the proposal to incorporate AIPs into the Shared Savings Program would make the Shared Savings Program attractive to organizations that were previously considering participation in the ACO Track of the CHART Model. The CHART Model ACO Track specifically targeted ACOs whose providers and suppliers were located in rural areas. We also noted our belief that the methodology to determine payments based upon a beneficiary's risk factors-based score, as proposed, would allow for greater reach to ACOs operating in under-resourced communities and encourage providers and suppliers in rural areas to form ACOs.

As we explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, as we seek to increase the percentage of people with Medicare in accountable care arrangements, we are balancing incentives and participation options to serve a dual purpose of sustaining participation by existing ACOs and increasing program growth, recognizing that ACOs vary in their composition of providers/suppliers, the needs of the populations they serve, and have varying degrees of efficiency relative to their region and experience with accountable care initiatives. We proposed modifications that would build on the existing Shared Savings Program benchmarking methodology by strengthening financial incentives for long term participation by reducing the impact of ACOs' performance on their benchmarks, addressing the impact of ACO market penetration on regional expenditures used to adjust and update benchmarks, and supporting the business case for ACOs serving high risk and high dually eligible populations to participate, which we believed would help sustain participation and grow the program. Additionally, we proposed modifications to the benchmarking methodology to mitigate bias in regional expenditure calculations that benefits ACOs electing prospective assignment. We explained that the changes we had proposed to the benchmarking methodology used in the Shared Savings Program would align with our consideration of more long-term benchmarking concepts that would move toward the use of administratively set benchmarks in order to grow and sustain long term program participation as discussed in the Comment Solicitation that we included in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule. We also proposed to expand opportunities for certain low revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track to share in savings even if they do not meet the minimum savings rate (MSR) to allow for investments in care redesign and quality improvement activities among less capitalized ACOs.

We proposed changes to the Shared Savings Program quality reporting and the quality performance requirements that were responsive to interested parties' feedback, and designed to support the transition of ACOs to all payer quality measure reporting. These proposals included reinstitution of a sliding scale reflecting an ACO's quality performance for use in determining shared savings for ACOs, regardless of how they report quality data, and revisions to the approach for determining shared losses for ENHANCED track ACOs. We proposed to implement a health equity adjustment to an ACO's quality performance score to recognize high quality performance by ACOs with high underserved populations. We also proposed to extend the incentive for reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs through PY 2024 to align with the sunsetting of the CMS Web Interface reporting option. In addition, we solicited comment from interested parties to inform future rulemaking through requests for information addressing social determinants of health in ACO populations, and the addition of new Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) for the Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) survey questions. We also proposed to resolve a gap in our current policy for benchmarking quality measures reported through the CMS Web Interface.

We proposed changes that we believed were important for improved operations of the Shared Savings Program, including policies to reduce ACO administrative burden. Specifically, we proposed to eliminate the requirement for an ACO to submit marketing materials to CMS for review and approval prior to disseminating materials to beneficiaries and ACO participants, and modifications to streamline the SNF 3-day rule waiver application review process. We also proposed modifications to the beneficiary notification requirements, including to reduce the frequency with which beneficiary information notices are provided to beneficiaries from annually to a minimum of once per agreement period, with a proposed follow-up beneficiary communication serving to promote beneficiary comprehension of the standardized written notice. Further, we proposed to revise the data sharing requirements to recognize ACOs structured as organized health care arrangements (OHCAs) for data sharing purposes.

b. Statutory and Regulatory Background on the Shared Savings Program

On March 23, 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Pub. L. 111-148) was enacted, followed by enactment of the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (Pub. L. 111-152) on March 30, 2010, which amended certain provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (hereinafter collectively referred to as “the Affordable Care Act”). Section 3022 of the Affordable Care Act amended Title XVIII of the Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq. ) by adding section 1899 of the Act to establish the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Shared Savings Program) to facilitate coordination and cooperation among healthcare providers to improve the quality of care for Medicare FFS beneficiaries and reduce the rate of growth in expenditures under Medicare Parts A and B. (See 42 U.S.C. 1395jjj.)

Section 1899 of the Act has been amended through subsequent legislation. The requirements for assignment of Medicare FFS beneficiaries to ACOs participating under the program were amended by the 21st Century Cures Act (the CURES Act) (Pub. L. 114-255, December 13, 2016). The Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 (Pub. L. 115-123, February 9, 2018), further amended section 1899 of the Act to provide for the following: expanded use of telehealth services by physicians or practitioners participating in an applicable ACO to furnish services to prospectively assigned beneficiaries; greater flexibility in the assignment of Medicare FFS beneficiaries to ACOs by allowing ACOs in tracks under retrospective beneficiary assignment a choice of prospective assignment for the agreement period; permitting Medicare FFS beneficiaries to voluntarily identify an ACO professional as their primary care provider and requiring that such beneficiaries be notified of the ability to make and change such identification, and mandating that any such voluntary identification will supersede claims-based assignment; and allowing ACOs under certain two-sided models to establish CMS-approved beneficiary incentive programs.

The Shared Savings Program regulations are codified at 42 CFR part 425. The final rule establishing the Shared Savings Program appeared in the November 2, 2011 Federal Register (Medicare Program; Medicare Shared Savings Program: Accountable Care Organizations; final rule (76 FR 67802) (hereinafter referred to as the “November 2011 final rule”)). A subsequent major update to the program rules appeared in the June 9, 2015 Federal Register (Medicare Program; Medicare Shared Savings Program: Accountable Care Organizations; final rule (80 FR 32692) (hereinafter referred to as the “June 2015 final rule”)). The final rule entitled, “Medicare Program; Medicare Shared Savings Program; Accountable Care Organizations—Revised Benchmark Rebasing Methodology, Facilitating Transition to Performance-Based Risk, and Administrative Finality of Financial Calculations,” which addressed changes related to the program's financial benchmark methodology, appeared in the June 10, 2016 Federal Register (81 FR 37950) (hereinafter referred to as the “June 2016 final rule”). A final rule, “Medicare Program; Revisions to Payment Policies Under the Physician Fee Schedule and Other Revisions to Part B for CY 2019; Medicare Shared Savings Program Requirements; Quality Payment Program; Medicaid Promoting Interoperability Program; Quality Payment Program—Extreme and Uncontrollable Circumstance Policy for the 2019 MIPS Payment Year; Provisions From the Medicare Shared Savings Program—Accountable Care Organizations—Pathways to Success; and Expanding the Use of Telehealth Services for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder Under the Substance Use-Disorder Prevention That Promotes Opioid Recovery and Treatment (SUPPORT) for Patients and Communities Act”, appeared in the November 23, 2018 Federal Register (83 FR 59452) (hereinafter referred to as the “November 2018 final rule” or the “CY 2019 PFS final rule”). In the November 2018 final rule, we finalized a voluntary 6-month extension for existing ACOs whose participation agreements would otherwise expire on December 31, 2018; allowed beneficiaries greater flexibility in designating their primary care provider and in the use of that designation for purposes of assigning the beneficiary to an ACO if the clinician they align with is participating in an ACO; revised the definition of primary care services used in beneficiary assignment; provided relief for ACOs and their clinicians impacted by extreme and uncontrollable circumstances in PY 2018 and subsequent years; established a new Certified Electronic Health Record Technology (CEHRT) use threshold requirement; and reduced the Shared Savings Program quality measure set from 31 to 23 measures (83 FR 59940 through 59990 and 59707 through 59715).

A final rule redesigning the Shared Savings Program appeared in the December 31, 2018 Federal Register (Medicare Program: Medicare Shared Savings Program; Accountable Care Organizations-Pathways to Success and Uncontrollable Circumstances Policies for Performance Year 2017; final rule) (83 FR 67816) (hereinafter referred to as the “December 2018 final rule”). In the December 2018 final rule, we finalized a number of policies for the Shared Savings Program, including a redesign of the participation options available under the program to encourage ACOs to transition to two-sided models; new tools to support coordination of care across settings and strengthen beneficiary engagement; and revisions to ensure rigorous benchmarking.

In the interim final rule with comment period (IFC) entitled “Medicare and Medicaid Programs; Policy and Regulatory Revisions in Response to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency”, which was effective on the March 31, 2020 date of display and appeared in the April 6, 2020 Federal Register (85 FR 19230) (hereinafter referred to as the “March 31, 2020 COVID-19 IFC”), we removed the restriction which prevented the application of the Shared Savings Program extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy for disasters that occur during the quality reporting period if the reporting period is extended, to offer relief under the Shared Savings Program to all ACOs that may be unable to completely and accurately report quality data for 2019 due to the PHE for COVID-19 (85 FR 19267 and 19268).

In the IFC entitled “Medicare and Medicaid Programs; Basic Health Program, and Exchanges; Additional Policy and Regulatory Revisions in Response to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency and Delay of Certain Reporting Requirements for the Skilled Nursing Facility Quality Reporting Program” which was effective on May 8, 2020, and appeared in the May 8, 2020 Federal Register (85 FR 27573 through 27587) (hereinafter referred to as the “May 8, 2020 COVID-19 IFC”), we modified Shared Savings Program policies to: (1) allow ACOs whose agreement periods expired on December 31, 2020, the option to extend their existing agreement period by 1-year, and allow ACOs in the BASIC track's glide path the option to elect to maintain their current level of participation for PY 2021; (2) adjust program calculations to remove payment amounts for episodes of care for treatment of COVID-19; and (3) expand the definition of primary care services for purposes of determining beneficiary assignment to include telehealth codes for virtual check-ins, e-visits, and telephonic communication. We also clarified the applicability of the program's extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy to mitigate shared losses for the period of the PHE for COVID-19 starting in January 2020.

We have also made use of the annual CY PFS rules to address quality reporting for the Shared Savings Program and certain other issues. Refer to the CY 2020 PFS proposed rule and the CY 2022 PFS final rule for a summary of policies finalized in prior PFS rules (84 FR 40705 and 86 FR 65253). In the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65253 through 65306), we finalized changes to Shared Savings Program policies, including to amend the reporting requirements under the APM Performance Pathway (APP) for PY 2022 and subsequent performance years, to freeze the quality performance standard at the 30th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score for PY 2023, to update the definition of primary care services used in beneficiary assignment at § 425.400(c), to revise the repayment mechanism arrangement policy, to streamline the application process, and to amend the beneficiary notification process.

Policies applicable to Shared Savings Program ACOs for purposes of reporting for other programs have also continued to evolve based on changes in the statute. The Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA) (Pub. L. 114-10, April 16, 2015) established the Quality Payment Program. In the CY 2017 Quality Payment Program final rule with comment period (81 FR 77008), we established regulations for the Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) and Advanced APMs and related policies applicable to eligible clinicians who participate in APMs, including the Shared Savings Program. We have also made updates to policies under the Quality Payment Program through the annual CY PFS rules.

c. Summary of Shared Savings Program Provisions

In sections III.G.2. through III.G.6. of this final rule, we summarize and respond to public comments received on proposed modifications to the Shared Savings Program's policies discussed in section III.G. of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46093 through 46218). Some commenters' suggestions for modifications to Shared Savings Program policies went beyond the scope of the proposals discussed in section III.G. of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, and will not be addressed in this section of this final rule. As a general summary, we are finalizing the following changes to Shared Savings Program policies to:

• Allow low revenue ACOs, inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, that are new to the Shared Savings Program (that is, not a renewing or re-entering ACO) to receive AIPs. ACOs wishing to receive AIPs must submit a supplemental application and proposed spend plan for CMS review. If approved to receive AIPs, the ACO will receive a one-time fixed payment of $250,000 and per beneficiary quarterly payments for the first 2 years of an ACO's 5-year agreement period. The quarterly payment amount is based on whether the beneficiary is enrolled in the Medicare Part D low-income subsidy (LIS) or is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid or the ADI national percentile rank of the census block group in which the beneficiary resides (section III.G.2.a. of this final rule). We are finalizing our proposal regarding quarterly payments with the modification that the risk factors-based score for a beneficiary will be set to 100 if the beneficiary is enrolled in the LIS or is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid or set to the ADI national percentile rank (an integer between 1 and 100) of the census block group in which the beneficiary resides if the beneficiary is not enrolled in the LIS or dually eligible. ACOs will receive higher payment amounts for assigned beneficiaries with higher risk factors-based scores.

• Allow ACOs applying to the program that are inexperienced with performance-based risk to participate in one 5-year agreement under a one-sided shared savings model, in order to provide these ACOs more time to invest in infrastructure and redesigned care processes for high quality and efficient health care service delivery before transitioning to performance-based risk (section III.G.2.b.(2) of this final rule). These ACOs may also be eligible for a subsequent agreement under the BASIC track glide path.

• Revise the limitation on the number of agreement periods an ACO can participate in BASIC track Level E (section III.G.2.b.(3) of this final rule).

• Revise the policies for determining beneficiary assignment (section III.G.3. of this final rule).

++ Update the definition of primary care services used in beneficiary assignment at § 425.400(c).

++ Identify how CMS certification numbers will be used in beneficiary assignment.

• Revise the quality reporting and the quality performance requirements for PY 2023 and subsequent performance years (section III.G.4. of this final rule).

++ Establish an alternative quality performance standard for ACOs that do not meet the quality performance standard to share in savings at the maximum rate by reinstating a sliding scale approach for determining shared savings for ACOs, regardless of how they report quality data and revise the approach for determining shared losses for ENHANCED track ACOs.

++ Establish a health equity adjustment that will upwardly adjust an ACO's quality performance score, to reward ACOs that report all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, that are high performing on quality, and serve a high proportion of underserved beneficiaries. This adjustment will add up to 10 bonus points to the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score. We are finalizing the proposed methodology for calculating the underserved multiplier with a modification to use enrollment in the LIS, in addition to Medicare and Medicaid dually eligibility and ADI score. The resulting health equity adjusted quality performance score will be used to determine whether the ACO meets the quality performance standard set at the 30th percentile (for PY 2023) or 40th percentile (for PY 2024 and subsequent years) across all MIPS Quality performance category scores; the final sharing rate for calculating shared savings payments under the BASIC track and the ENHANCED track for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard we are finalizing that allows for application of a sliding scale based on quality performance; and the shared loss rate for calculating shared losses under the ENHANCED track under the modified approach to the scaling of shared losses we are also finalizing in this final rule. The health equity adjusted quality performance score will also be used when applying the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy for ACOs that report quality data via the APP and meet data completeness and case minimum requirements.

++ Extend the incentive for reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs through PY 2024 to align with the sunsetting of the CMS Web Interface reporting option.

++ Change the nomenclature of the administrative claims measure Risk Standardized, All-Cause Unplanned Admissions for Multiple Chronic Conditions for MIPS to Clinician and Clinician Group Risk-standardized Hospital Admission Rates for Patients with Multiple Chronic Conditions to align with the MIPS program.

++ Clarify use of unweighted MIPS Quality performance category scores to determine the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program.

++ Clarify our policies on reopenings to address changes to MIPS quality performance category scores.

++ Establish policies for benchmarking quality measures reported through the CMS Web Interface for PY 2022 through PY 2024.

• Revise the benchmarking methodology to reduce the effect of ACO performance on ACO historical benchmarks, increase opportunities for ACOs caring for medically complex, high cost beneficiaries, and strengthen incentives for ACOs to enter and remain in the Shared Savings Program, and meet the programmatic goals of improving quality of care and lowering growth in FFS expenditures:

++ Incorporate a prospectively projected administrative growth factor, a variant of the United States Per Capita Cost (USPCC) referred to in this final rule as the Accountable Care Prospective Trend (ACPT), into a three-way blend with national and regional growth rates to update an ACO's historical benchmark and address increasing market saturation by ACOs in a regional service area (section III.G.5.c.(3) of this final rule).

++ Adjust benchmarks to account for prior savings, helping to mitigate lowering of an ACO's benchmark over time by returning to an ACO's benchmark an amount that reflects its success in lowering growth in expenditures from the previous agreement period (section III.G.5.c.(4) of this final rule).

++ Reduce the impact of negative regional adjustments on ACO benchmarks by reducing the cap on negative regional adjustments and gradually decreasing the negative regional adjustment amount as an ACO's weighted-average prospective HCC risk score increases, or the proportion of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries increases, or both (section III.G.5.c.(5) of this final rule).

• Change how we calculate regional factors used in benchmarking to increase internal consistency of benchmark calculations for ACOs under prospective beneficiary assignment by using an assignment window that is consistent with an ACO's selected assignment methodology to identify the assignable population used to calculate regional FFS expenditures (section III.G.5.d. of this final rule).

• Revise how we cap positive prospective HCC risk score growth to better account for medically complex, high cost populations while continuing to guard against coding initiatives (section III.G.5.e. of this final rule).

• Increase opportunities for low revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track to share in savings by expanding the criteria ACOs can meet to qualify for shared savings payments as described in § 425.605 (section III.G.5.f. of this final rule).

• Discuss ongoing considerations regarding the impact of the PHE for COVID-19 on ACO expenditures (section III.G.5.g. of this final rule), although there are no associated revisions to the regulations at this time.

• Exclude the new supplemental payment under the Medicare Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment System (IPPS) for Indian Health Service (IHS)/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico from the determination of Medicare Parts A and B expenditures for purposes of calculations under the Shared Savings Program and include this new supplemental payment in calculations of ACO participant revenue for the performance year beginning January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years (section III.G.5.h. of this final rule).

• Remove the requirement to submit marketing materials prior to use (section III.G.6.b. of this final rule). ACOs will be required to submit marketing materials only upon request from CMS, but we are retaining the requirement that an ACO must discontinue use of any marketing materials or activities for which CMS has issued a notice of disapproval.

• Amend the beneficiary notification requirements to reduce the frequency with which beneficiary information notices are provided to beneficiaries from annually to a minimum of once per agreement period, with a follow up beneficiary communication serving to promote beneficiary comprehension of the standardized written notice and occurring no later than 180 days following the date that the standardized written notice was provided to the beneficiary (section III.G.6.c. of this final rule).

• Amend the beneficiary notification requirements to clarify that ACOs and ACO participants are required to post signs in all facilities and make standardized written notices available upon request in all settings in which beneficiaries receive primary care services (section III.G.6.c. of this final rule).

• Remove the requirement for an ACO to submit certain narratives when applying for the SNF 3-day rule waiver and replace with a requirement that an ACO submit an attestation that it has established the narratives and will make them available to CMS upon request (section III.G.6.d. of this final rule).

• Amend the data sharing regulations to recognize ACOs structured as OHCAs for data sharing purposes (section III.G.6.e. of this final rule).

We also solicited comments on the following:

• On two potential social determinants of health (SDOH) measures for future measure development, and the addition of new Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) for the Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) survey questions, as discussed in section III.G.4. of this final rule.

• On an alternative approach to calculating ACO historical benchmarks that would use administratively-set benchmarks that are decoupled from ongoing observed FFS spending, as discussed in section III.G.7. of this final rule.

In combination, the policies we are adopting for the Shared Savings Program in this final rule are anticipated to grow participation particularly from ACOs serving beneficiaries with greater needs and higher baseline spending. The incentive for ACOs to reduce spending over multiple agreement periods is also expected to be bolstered, for example by reducing the weighting on the regional component of the benchmark update and by providing a prior savings adjustment at rebasing. A further change will prevent an assignment bias from inflating benchmark adjustments for ACOs electing prospective assignment. In summary, as described in section VII of this final rule, we project a $15.5 billion decrease in spending on benefits (that is, savings from efficiency) and $650 million in higher net shared savings payments to ACOs, or $14.8 billion lower overall spending compared to the program baseline (which would have been projected to be a $4.2 billion net cost absent these changes).

Certain policies, including both existing policies and the new policies adopted in this final rule, as described in section III.G. of this final rule, rely upon the authority granted in section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to use other payment models that the Secretary determines will improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare program, and that do not result in program expenditures greater than those that would result under the statutory payment model. The following policies require the use of our authority under section 1899(i) of the Act: allowing for AIPs as described in section III.G.2. of this final rule: the modifications to the calculation of the shared loss rate under the ENHANCED track to allow for a sliding scale based on an alternative quality performance standard as described in section III.G.4. of this final rule; use of the ACPT/national-regional three-way blended benchmark update factor as described in section III.G.5.c.(3) of this final rule; the expansion of the criteria for certain low revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track to qualify for shared savings in the event the ACO does not meet the MSR as required under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(i) of the Act as described in section III.G.5.f. of this final rule; and the exclusion of the new supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and Puerto Rico hospitals from the determination of Medicare Parts A and B expenditures used in certain financial calculations under the Shared Savings Program as described in section III.G.5.h. of this final rule. As described in the Regulatory Impact Analysis in section VII. of this final rule, the changes we are finalizing to our payment methodology are expected to improve the quality and efficiency of care under the Medicare program and are not expected to result in a situation in which the payment methodology under the Shared Savings Program, including all policies adopted under the authority of section 1899(i) of the Act, results in more spending under the program than would have resulted under the statutory payment methodology in section 1899(d) of the Act. We will continue to reexamine this projection in the future to ensure that the requirement under section 1899(i)(3)(B) of the Act that an alternative payment model not result in additional program expenditures continues to be satisfied. In the event that we later determine that the payment model that includes policies established under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act no longer meets the requirements of section 1899(i)(3) of the Act, we would undertake additional notice and comment rulemaking to make adjustments to the payment model to assure continued compliance with the statutory requirements.

2. Shared Savings Program Participation Options

a. Increasing Participation in Accountable Care Models in Underserved Communities by Providing an Option for Advance Investment Payments to Certain ACOs

(1) Background

In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67969), we estimated an average of $0.58 million for the start-up investment costs and $1.27 million in ongoing annual operating costs for an ACO participating in the Shared Savings Program. This can be a substantial investment particularly for a small organization or an organization caring for underserved or more medically complex patients. The CMS Innovation Center has tested two models designed to support new ACOs in joining and succeeding in the Shared Savings Program. The Advance Payment (AP) ACO Model operated from 2012 to 2015, and the AIM operated from 2015 to 2018. The models tested whether upfront payments would increase participation in the Shared Savings Program by ACOs serving rural or underserved regions. The models also tested whether such payments would improve quality or reduce Medicare spending without negatively affecting quality. 235 Both models operated by pre-paying shared savings to ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program and later recouping such amounts from earned shared savings.

235 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Advance Payment Accountable Care Organization (ACO) Model (updated January 10, 2013), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/files/fact-sheet/advanced-payment-aco-model-fact-sheet.pdf ; Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Accountable Care Organization Investment Model (AIM) Request for Applications (October 14, 2014), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/files/x/aim-rfa.pdf .

The AP ACO model tested whether the pre-payment of shared savings would increase participation in the Shared Savings Program by smaller providers and suppliers in rural and underserved areas, and whether these payments would allow ACOs to improve care for beneficiaries, generate Medicare savings more quickly, and increase the amount of total Medicare savings. 236 The eligibility standards for the AP ACO model required that an ACO enter the Shared Savings Program in April 2012 or July 2012. The ACO also had to meet one of the following standards: (1) not include any inpatient facilities and have less than $50 million in total annual revenue; or (2) not include any inpatient facilities other than critical access hospitals (CAHs) and/or Medicare low-volume rural hospitals and have less than $80 million in total annual revenue. 237 Prepaid shared savings included an upfront payment of $250,000 and a one-time payment of $36 per beneficiary, followed by an $8 per beneficiary per month payment for 2 years. AP ACOs received between $1.3-$2.7M in total prepaid shared savings. 238 CMS recovered pre-paid shared savings from an ACO's earned shared savings only if the ACO terminated before 3 years, in which case the ACO was required to immediately repay its prepaid shared savings payments in full. 239

236 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Advance Payment Accountable Care Organization (ACO) Model (updated January 10, 2013), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/files/fact-sheet/advanced-payment-aco-model-fact-sheet.pdf .

237 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Advance Payment Accountable Care Organization (ACO) Model Application Process (updated January 5, 2012), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/files/slides/advance-payment-model-aco-odf-application-process-slides.pdf .

238 L&M Policy Research, Evaluation of CMMI Accountable Care Organization Initiatives: Advance Payment ACO Final Report 39-41 (November 25, 2016), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/files/reports/advpayaco-fnevalrpt.pdf .

239 Ibid at 14.

AIM tested whether the pre-payment of shared savings helped to recruit and accelerated favorable outcomes for new ACOs in the Shared Savings Program from rural, low-penetration and underserved geographies. 240 There were two cohorts of AIM, referred to as Test 1 and Test 2. The eligibility standards to join Test 1 of AIM required that an ACO be: (1) new to the Shared Savings Program; (2) not include a hospital unless it was a critical access hospital or a small Inpatient Prospective Payment System (IPPS) hospital; and (3) not owned or operated by a health plan. 241 The prepaid shared savings amounts were distributed and recouped in the same amounts and manner as the AP ACO model for the majority of model participants. 242 ACOs joining Test 2 of AIM were not new to the Shared Savings Program and were required to directly repay any unrecouped prepaid shared savings at the end of their second Shared Savings Program agreement period. Conclusions from Test 2 of AIM were unable to be drawn due to low participation. 243 All further references to AIM refer to Test 1 of the model, unless otherwise specified.

240 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Accountable Care Organization Investment Model (AIM) Request for Applications (October 14, 2014), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/files/x/aim-rfa.pdf .

241 Ibid.

242 Ibid.

243 Abt Associates, Evaluation of the Accountable Care Organization Investment Model Final Report 20 (September 2020), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/data-and-reports/2020/aim-final-annrpt .

The results of the Innovation Center's evaluation of the AP ACO Model were inconclusive regarding the impact on quality or cost of care. While most ACOs included in the test continued to participate in the Shared Savings Program after the AP ACO Model ended, the Model did not significantly improve the quality or cost of care when compared to care provided outside the Shared Savings Program. 244 The results of the evaluation of AIM, however, found that the model was successful in meeting both its goals. AIM successfully encouraged ACOs to form in areas where ACOs may not have otherwise formed and where other Medicare payment and delivery innovations were less likely to be present. 245 AIM also generated an estimated net aggregate reduction in spending by Medicare of $381.5 million after accounting for Medicare's payment of AIM funds and ACOs' earned shared savings. 246 AIM did not reduce the quality of care provided to beneficiaries. 247

244 L&M Policy Research, Evaluation of CMMI Accountable Care Organization Initiatives: Advance Payment ACO Final Report 39-41 (November 25, 2016), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/files/reports/advpayaco-fnevalrpt.pdf .

245 Abt Associates, Evaluation of the Accountable Care Organization Investment Model Final Report 20 (September 2020), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/data-and-reports/2020/aim-final-annrpt .

246 Ibid. at 39.

247 Ibid. at 57-60.

We have received continued interest in the AIM and AP ACO models and ongoing requests to implement policies with similar upfront and ongoing payments for ACOs newly participating in the Shared Savings Program. Interested parties believe these models were valuable for transitioning small and rural practices into ACOs and believe there is ongoing need for this type of support. We agree, and we also believe that the Shared Savings Program should provide an entry point for all willing organizations that wish to move towards providing value-driven healthcare.

Section 1899(i) of the Act authorizes the Secretary to use other payment models instead of the one-sided model described in section 1899(d) of the Act so long as the Secretary determines that the other payment model would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries without additional program expenditures. In accordance with the authority provided to the Secretary by section 1899(i) of the Act, we proposed to make advance shared savings payments, referred to herein as advance investment payments (AIPs), to certain ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program to improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries by enhancing the accessibility of the Shared Savings Program (87 FR 45860). Such payments would be made pursuant to the standards we proposed to establish in new § 425.630.

As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 45860 at 46450), we envision that this new payment option would distribute AIPs to ACOs for 2 years in order to reduce the financial barriers encountered by small providers and suppliers as they join the Shared Savings Program. These payments would be recouped from any shared savings the ACO earned. Funding the ACOs for 2 years would align with the policy in AIM. The AIPs are designed to reduce upfront costs that prevent providers and suppliers from forming ACOs, caring for beneficiaries in underserved communities, and achieving long term success in the Shared Savings Program.

Section 1899(i)(3)(A) of the Act requires CMS to determine that AIPs would improve the quality and efficiency of items furnished to Medicare in order to make such payments. We believe that AIPs meet this standard because such payments would be modeled on the AIM payments, which were shown to improve the quality and efficiency of care. The AIM evaluation report concluded that AIM successfully encouraged ACOs to form in geographic areas where ACOs may not otherwise have formed, the upfront funding provided by CMS assisted in the formation of the ACOs, and there was a reduction in Medicare spending and utilization without a reduction in the quality of care provided or patient and caregiver experiences. 248 The AIM evaluation found that, across all AIM Test 1 ACOs, the model reduced per beneficiary per month (PBPM) total Medicare spending by an estimated $28.21 in PY1, $36.94 in PY2, and $38.73 in PY3 compared to beneficiaries in the AIM ACOs' non-ACO FFS market comparison group. 249 The estimates translated to an aggregate Medicare spending reduction of $131.0M in 2016, $187.7M in 2017, and $207.7 in 2018. 250

248 Abt Associates, Evaluation of the Accountable Care Organization Investment Model Final Report 2-3 (September 2020), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/data-and-reports/2020/aim-final-annrpt .

249 Abt Associates, Evaluation of the Accountable Care Organization Investment Model Final Report 2 (September 2020), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/data-and-reports/2020/aim-final-annrpt .

250 Ibid. at 41.

Section 1899(i)(3)(B) of the Act requires CMS to determine that AIPs, when implemented in combination with existing modifications made to the Shared Savings Program payment model specified in section 1899(d) of the Act, will not result in additional program expenditures. The addition of AIP meets this standard. Please review section VI.E.7 of this final rule for a fuller discussion of the financial impact of the Shared Savings Program payment model, including the findings necessary to demonstrate compliance with section 1899(i)(3)(B) of the Act.

We intend to periodically reassess whether a payment model established under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act, including the payment of advance investments, continues to improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries without resulting in additional program expenditures. If we determine that the payment model no longer satisfies the requirements of section 1899(i)(3) of the Act, for example if the payment model results in net program costs, we would undertake additional notice and comment rulemaking to adjust our payment methodology to assure continued compliance with the statutory requirements.

We received hundreds of public comments on the proposal to implement AIP beginning in PY 2024. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: The majority of commenters supported the implementation of AIPs for the Shared Savings Program. Many commenters agreed that AIPs will enable clinical practices to partner with community-based organizations to identify and meet the needs of underserved beneficiaries.

MedPAC supported the AIP and the approach of basing payments on caring for underserved beneficiaries. MedPAC cautioned, however, that the impacts of the AIP may not be the same as those found in AIM or the Advance Payment Model given the different criteria for eligibility and how the funds should be spent. MedPAC urged CMS to continue to monitor and evaluate the impact of providing these funds on program spending and quality of care.

Response: We agree with commenters that AIPs are a critical step in enabling clinical practices to partner with community-based organizations when identifying and providing care to underserved beneficiaries, which we note may include those who are impacted by SDOH factors that contribute to poor health outcomes. We appreciate MedPAC's support for this policy, and we will monitor and evaluate the impact of providing AIPs to ensure the program meets the requirements under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act.

Comment: One commenter supported our proposal to implement AIPs, as the payments would encourage provider-led ACOs to successfully participate in the Shared Savings Program and level the playing field between physician-led and hospital-led ACOs. One commenter noted that many independent home care medicine (HCM) practices are interested in engaging in value-based care but often do not have the infrastructure or technology needed to be able to successfully participate and report important data.

Response: We appreciate the commenter noting that this proposal encourages participation among physician-led ACOs and agree that AIPs will provide important start-up funding to establish ACO provider networks in underserved communities. We appreciate the commenter for reminding CMS of the importance of HCMs in improving outcomes for patients when they are discharged to the community.

(2) Eligibility

In October of 2021, CMS outlined a renewed vision and strategy for how the Innovation Center will drive health system transformation to achieve equitable outcomes through high-quality, affordable, person-centered care for all beneficiaries. 251 We believe accountable care reduces fragmentation in patient care and lowers costs by giving providers and suppliers the incentives and tools to deliver high-quality, coordinated, team-based care. In partnership with the Innovation Center and in support of our shared goal of increasing the number of beneficiaries in a care relationship with accountability for quality and total cost of care, we proposed broad eligibility requirements for AIPs that will lower the barrier of entry to the Shared Savings Program for low revenue ACOs that are inexperienced with risk.

251 https://innovation.cms.gov/strategic-direction .

As discussed above, the AIPs are designed to assist ACOs that face difficulty funding the start-up costs for forming ACOs, caring for beneficiaries in underserved communities, and achieving long term success in the Shared Savings Program. Building upon AIM's success with new ACOs and ACOs inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, we proposed to limit the eligibility for AIPs to these same groups. Our experience administering the Shared Savings Program suggests that re-entering and renewing ACOs have alternative payment model (APM) experience and would not need, or benefit as significantly from, the start-up funds that AIPs provide because they have already invested in creating an ACO. Additionally, we do not have data from our experience with AIM to conclude that previously established ACOs need or benefit from upfront shared savings. The final evaluation report for AIM could not draw conclusions for AIM Test 2 ACOs, which involved only previously established ACOs, because of the small number of AIM Test 2 ACOs and the variation in results between them. Six AIM Test 2 ACOs started AIM in April 2015 or January 2016. Two AIM Test 2 ACOs ceased participating in the Shared Savings Program at the end of 2015, leaving four AIM Test 2 ACOs evaluated in each of three performance years. 252

252 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, ACO Investment Model (AIM) Final Evaluation Report (September 2020) available at https://innovation.cms.gov/data-and-reports/2020/aim-finalannrpt-perspective .

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 45860), we proposed eligibility criteria modified from the AIM eligibility criteria. The eligibility standards to join Test 1 of AIM required that an ACO be: (1) new to the Shared Savings Program; (2) not include a hospital unless it was a critical access hospital or a small IPPS hospital; and (3) not owned or operated by a health plan. 253 The model also prioritized ACOs in rural locations and those in locations with low ACO penetration through the use of scoring criteria. 254 We believe certain eligibility modifications are necessary to scale advance payments from a model to a regular component of the Shared Savings Program and to align with the Innovation Center's stated vision for health care transformation. As AIM was only available to a limited number of ACOs, it relied on scoring criteria in addition to its eligibility standards to select the highest scoring applicants. The Shared Savings Program does not have a similar limitation; therefore, we proposed more inclusive eligibility criteria.

253 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Accountable Care Organization Investment Model (AIM) Request for Applications (October 14, 2014), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/files/x/aim-rfa.pdf .

254 Ibid.

We are also broadening the eligibility criteria compared to AIM to reflect our belief that it is important to provide an incentive for providers and suppliers who serve high need beneficiaries in all areas to form ACOs. Similar to AIM, we intend for AIPs to encourage the formation of new ACOs in rural areas; however, unlike AIM we also want to recognize that there are underserved beneficiaries who reside in urban areas and who can also benefit from the high-quality coordinated care an ACO can provide. Additionally, underserved beneficiaries may receive care from providers and suppliers within a geographic area with high alternative payment model penetration. Generally, such providers and suppliers and the beneficiaries they serve are not or have not been part of an ACO previously. Therefore, as explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we do not believe we should limit AIP eligibility only to ACOs in rural communities or in areas with low ACO penetration.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 45860 at 46099), we proposed to establish the eligibility criteria for AIPs in § 425.630(b). Specifically, we proposed that CMS must determine that an ACO meets all of the following criteria for the ACO to be eligible to begin receiving AIPs:

• The ACO is not a renewing ACO or re-entering ACO (as such terms are defined under § 425.20).

• The ACO has applied to participate in the Shared Savings Program under any level of the BASIC track glide path and is eligible to participate in the Shared Savings Program.

• The ACO is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives.

• The ACO is a low revenue ACO.

AIM required applicants to demonstrate an exceptional need for prepaid shared savings. In the Shared Savings Program, the definition of low revenue is a similar criterion for determining ACO funding needs. Under § 425.20, a low revenue ACO means an ACO whose total Medicare Parts A and B FFS revenue of its ACO participants based on revenue for the most recent calendar year for which 12 months of data are available, is less than 35 percent of the total Medicare Parts A and B FFS expenditures for the ACO's assigned beneficiaries based on expenditures for the most recent calendar year for which 12 months of data are available. Low revenue ACOs tend to be small, physician-led ACOs that are less well capitalized organizations. These ACOs may be encouraged to participate and remain in the program based on the availability of additional incentives, such as the opportunity to receive AIPs.

We proposed conforming changes to § 425.611(c)(4) to limit eligibility to low revenue ACOs (87 FR 45860 at 46100). In accordance with § 425.611(c)(4), we adjust Shared Savings Program calculations to exclude all Parts A and B FFS payment amounts for a beneficiary's episodes of care for treatment of COVID-19 from expenditure and revenue calculations for purposes of identifying whether an ACO is a high revenue ACO or low revenue ACO and determining an ACO's eligibility for participation options. We proposed to revise § 425.611(c)(4) to exclude all Parts A and B FFS payment amounts for a beneficiary's episodes of care for treatment of COVID-19 from expenditure and revenue calculations for purposes of determining an ACO's eligibility to receive AIPs.

We proposed to limit eligibility to ACOs applying to participate under any level of the BASIC track glide path because this participation option is indicative of an ACO's inexperience with performance-based risk (87 FR 45860 at 46100). ACOs in the BASIC track are typically less experienced with risk and are more likely to benefit from upfront funding or ongoing financial assistance.

In summary, we proposed to create a new paragraph in § 425.100(d) to establish that an ACO may receive AIPs. We also proposed in § 425.630(b) to specify the eligibility criteria for an ACO to begin receiving receive AIPs, and we proposed conforming changes to § 425.630(c)(4). We sought comments on these proposals.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposed eligibility criteria for an ACO to receive AIPs and our responses:

Comment: Many commenters supported additional opportunities for ACOs to participate in AIPs, and contended that expanding eligibility to existing ACOs would benefit underserved beneficiaries and work to combat health inequities. They stated that AIPs would benefit ACO beneficiaries in underserved communities who lack adequate healthcare access as the revenue status of an ACO does not reflect these costs. Several commenters noted that AIP funds should be available to all ACOs to address SDOH and improve health outcomes by providing preventative and social services.

Two commenters encouraged CMS to consider the expansion of AIP eligibility to those ACOs that can demonstrate need among patient populations. One commenter suggested CMS could require high revenue ACOs to provide a plan to CMS on how they would use the payments to address SDOH among underserved populations. Examples of appropriate investments could be the launch of a food as medicine program, further investments on affordable housing, and adopting or expanding the use of community health workers.

Response: We agree with commenters that AIPs will improve ACO participation and assist in providing coordinated care to underserved populations. However, expanding AIP eligibility to all ACOs or even all ACOs that can demonstrate need among their patient populations is not consistent with the purpose of AIP and we do not believe it would be an appropriate use of the Trust Funds. AIP is not intended to provide indefinite support to ACOs or to ACOs of all sizes, but to help provide start-up funding needed prior to earning shared savings for those ACOs that face difficulty finding such funding. Historically, the Shared Savings Program has shown that re-entering and renewing ACOs have already benefited from APM experience, and therefore, would be less likely to need financial support to become operational or develop programs targeting SDOH. We expect that existing ACOs already participating and earning shared savings have access to more resources to serve their aligned beneficiaries. Additionally, we believe that many existing ACOs already have developed health IT infrastructures in place to support and coordinate quality care.

Comment: Many commenters advocated that CMS should expand AIP eligibility criteria to include all ACOs regardless of an ACO's high or low revenue status. These commenters requested that CMS remove the low revenue AIP eligibility criterion. The commenters contended that the exclusion of high revenue ACOs from the eligibility criteria would preclude from participation in AIP many ACOs with key safety-net providers such as teaching hospitals, federally qualified health centers (FQHCs), rural health clinics (RHCs), and CAHs. One commenter noted that the distinction between high and low revenue ACOs creates a two-tier system for ACOs, leading to an unlevel playing field between physician-led and hospital-led ACOs that could reduce participation of hospital-led ACOs. One commenter reminded CMS that most high revenue ACOs include a hospital in their composition and would not be eligible to receive AIPs. A few commenters noted in the alternative that CMS should broaden the eligibility criteria to allow ACOs with safety net providers on their participation lists to receive AIPs, even if they did not otherwise meet all of the proposed eligibility criteria. Another commenter contended that the low revenue eligibility requirement would prevent some ACOs with underserved patient populations from receiving AIPs. Several commenters supported the low revenue eligibility requirement as it captures smaller ACOs with diverse beneficiary populations, which specifically targets safety net providers, those serving underserved communities, and less financially resourced organizations. Several commenters supported CMS' decision not to limit AIPs to rural areas or areas with low ACO penetration because an urban area could also include ACOs with underserved populations and meet the AIP eligibility criteria.

Response: We agree that safety-net providers and high revenue ACOs serve vulnerable communities, but we disagree with commenters that CMS should remove the low revenue eligibility criterion. The AIP eligibility requirements are intended to incentivize greater participation for ACOs that: (1) are inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives; and (2) have limited capital and insufficient resources to fund start-up costs. The intent of the AIP payment is to advance shared savings in order to provide start-up funding for ACOs that are less well capitalized than a high revenue ACO. We disagree that the eligibility criteria penalizes high revenue ACOs, as we believe that high revenue ACOs should not need advance funding from CMS to increase staffing, improve health care infrastructure, and provide accountable care for underserved beneficiaries. We expect that AIPs will enable the formation of more ACOs with underserved beneficiaries who receive care from providers and suppliers that have not been ACO participants previously.

While we agree with commenters that safety-net facilities, such as FQHCs, RHCs, and CAHs provide important primary care services to rural and underserved communities, we disagree that the AIP eligibility criteria should include an exception for high revenue ACOs that include safety-net providers as ACO participants. We believe this would result in many ACOs receiving AIPs that do not need access to start-up capital. The vast majority of FQHCs and RHCs participating in Shared Savings Program ACOs without a hospital are in low revenue ACOs, so CMS does not believe this requirement will preclude participation of FQHCs or RHCs. CMS plans to monitor the impact of AIP on ACO formation and program participation, including the impact on CAHs.

Comment: One commenter cautioned CMS that the proposed eligibility criteria for low revenue ACOs may be too limited as high revenue facilities may also serve specific populations that have been historically underrepresented in value-based programs. The commenter encouraged CMS to reevaluate if the definition of low revenue ACO best captures the ACOs that lack upfront capital and sufficiently excludes providers that have the capital to join without AIPs.

Response: We believe the AIP eligibility criteria will sufficiently limit access to AIP to those ACOs that are most likely to need start-up funding, including those serving underrepresented populations. CMS will conduct monitoring and evaluation activities to determine the impact of the AIP eligibility criteria on ACO participation and to ensure that the program meets the requirements under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act. Limiting the eligibility criteria to low revenue ACOs will encourage the formation of new ACOs that would not otherwise join the Shared Savings Program due to the lack of start-up funds. AIPs address barriers to entry by providing advance payments of shared savings.

Comment: Several commenters encouraged CMS to consider expanding the types of ACOs that would be eligible to receive AIPs. Specifically, these commenters advocated that CMS permit ACOs entering the ENHANCED track to be eligible to participate in AIP. The commenters indicated that such a policy would encourage ACOs that have accepted downside risk to implement strategies that would effectively create savings for the program. Other commenters noted that even ACOs that are experienced with performance-based risk may lack resources and infrastructure to meaningfully address SDOH and overcome health care inequities for underserved beneficiaries.

Response: We disagree that ACOs participating in the ENHANCED track should be eligible to apply for AIPs. Given the level of risk involved in the ENHANCED track, ACOs in that track are generally well established and confident in their ability to coordinate care for their beneficiary population. Moreover, with effective management and planning, such ACOs should not need additional advance funding from CMS to increase staffing, improve health care infrastructure, and provide accountable care for underserved beneficiaries. We note that, depending on the circumstances, not all AIPs will be recouped from an ACO. Accordingly, we prefer to finalize more limited eligibility criteria at this time because such a policy is more fiscally prudent.

For the reasons discussed above, we are finalizing our proposed eligibility criteria without change. AIP eligibility is limited to new, low revenue ACOs that are inexperienced with performance-based risk and have applied to participate in the Shared Savings Program under any level of the BASIC track's glide path. Specifically, we are finalizing as proposed § 425.630(b) to describe the eligibility criteria for an ACO to receive AIPs. Beginning January 1, 2024, an ACO is eligible to receive AIPs if CMS determines that all of the following criteria are met: (1) the ACO is not a renewing or a re-entering ACO; (2) the ACO has applied to participate in the Shared Savings Program under any level of the BASIC track's glide path and is eligible to participate in the Shared Savings Program; (3) the ACO is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives; and (4) the ACO is a low revenue ACO.

(3) Application Procedure & Contents

We proposed to address the process for an ACO to apply for AIPs in § 425.630(c). Specifically, we proposed that, to obtain a determination regarding whether an ACO may receive AIPs, the ACO must submit, as part of its application to participate in the Shared Savings Program, complete supplemental application information in the form and manner and by a deadline specified by CMS. The application cycle for AIPs would be conducted as part of and in conjunction with the Shared Savings Program application process under § 425.202 with instructions and timeline published through the Shared Savings Program website. We proposed that the initial application cycle to apply for AIPs would be for a January 1, 2024, start date. As noted in section III.G.2.a.(2) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, ACOs currently participating in the Shared Savings Program or applying to renew their participation agreement would not be eligible to apply. We noted in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule that we intended to provide further information regarding the process, including the application and specific requirements such as the deadline for submitting applications, through subregulatory guidance and would also provide a feedback process to afford an opportunity for the applicant to clarify or revise its application.

We proposed in § 425.630(d)(1) that an ACO must submit sufficient information for CMS to determine whether the ACO is eligible to receive such payments. We also noted that CMS would provide preliminary information to the applicant ACO about its eligibility to receive AIPs during the Phase 1 application cycle requests for information, and a final determination about its eligibility to receive AIPs at the time of final application dispositions. For example, we would provide preliminary information identifying whether an ACO is low revenue and inexperienced with performance-based risk through the ACO's application to participate in the Shared Savings Program.

We further proposed at § 425.630(d)(1) that an ACO would be required to submit a spend plan as part of its application for AIPs. At § 425.630(d)(2), we proposed content requirements for spend plans. We proposed that the plan must identify how the ACO will spend the AIPs during the agreement period to build care coordination capabilities (including coordination with community-based organizations, as appropriate), address specific health disparities, and meet other criteria under § 425.630. In addition, we proposed that the spend plan must identify the categories of goods and services that will be purchased, the dollar amounts to be spent on the various categories, and such other information as may be specified by CMS. As more fully explained in section III.G.2.a.(4) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we proposed at § 425.630(e)(4) to require ACOs to segregate AIPs from all other revenues by establishing and maintaining a separate account into which the ACO must immediately deposit all AIPs. Accordingly, we also proposed at § 425.630(d)(2)(iii) that the spend plan must include a statement that the ACO has established a separate designated account for the deposit and expenditure of all AIPs in accordance with § 425.630(e)(4).

As explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 45860), we did not intend for the spend plan requirement, as proposed, to create a benchmark requirement against which we would hold the ACO accountable. Instead, we intended it to aid CMS in tracking ACO progress toward implementing their spend plan and any challenges or changes in strategy that occur following their receipt of AIPs. We noted that we believe that ACOs have the flexibility to better understand their needs over time and evolve their spending accordingly.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we also explained that while we do not intend an ACO's spend plan to limit the ACO to specific uses of AIPs within the broad categories of acceptable uses, we would reserve the right to terminate an ACO's ability to receive AIPs if it is not in compliance with requirements of the Shared Savings Program (see our proposal described in section III.G.2.a.(7).(b) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule). In addition, by certifying its application under § 425.202(a)(2), the ACO certifies that the information contained in the application, including the information necessary to determine eligibility for AIPs, is accurate, complete, and truthful.

We proposed at § 425.630(d)(3) that we would review the information submitted in the ACO's application to determine whether an ACO meets the eligibility criteria and other requirements for AIP and would approve or deny the application for AIPs accordingly. We noted that we would review the ACO's Shared Savings Program application simultaneously with the supplemental information in its AIP application. We also noted that the denial of an AIP application would be subject to reconsideration review in accordance with the standards specified in subpart I of part 425.

In addition, we proposed at § 425.630(d)(3) that CMS may review the spend plan at any time and require the ACO to make changes to its spend plan comply with § 425.630(e)(1) as a result of that review. Examples of permitted uses are described in section III.G.2.a.(4) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule. As proposed, if the ACO fails to provide a spend plan that complies with § 425.630(e), CMS could terminate the ACO's AIPs pursuant to § 425.630(h)(1)(i) and take other remedial action under § 425.216 or § 425.218.

We also proposed to update our public reporting requirements under § 425.308 by adding new paragraph (b)(8) to require an ACO to publicly report its spend plan. We proposed to require that the ACO post on its dedicated public reporting web page: (1) the total amount of AIPs received from CMS for each performance year; (2) the ACO's spend plan; and (3) an itemization of how the AIPs were actually spent during the year, including expenditure categories, the dollar amounts spent on the various categories, any changes to the spend plan as submitted under § 425.630(d)(1), and such other information as may be specified by CMS. The public reporting template that CMS provides to ACOs annually would be updated to reflect the new information categories that an ACO must report.

We proposed to add § 425.630(c) and (d) to establish standards for the contents of an application to be determined eligible for AIPs, as well as the procedures for filing such an application. We solicited comments on these proposals.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposed application procedure and content requirements and our responses:

Comment: Several commenters requested that CMS provide guidance (that is, FAQs, sample application, templates) for spend plans in preparation for application cycles. One commenter suggested that CMS offer technical assistance on spend plan development, inform providers of this opportunity, and support them through the application process for the program.

Response: Prior to the start of the application process, we intend to provide further guidance regarding the PY 2024 application process, including the content of the application and specific requirements such as the deadline for submitting applications and the contents of spend plans. We would also provide a feedback process to afford an opportunity for the applicant to clarify or revise its application.

Comment: Several commenters recognized that AIP would take time to implement, but thought that AIP funding should be available to new ACOs that began participating in the Shared Savings Program before January 1, 2024. One commenter advocated that new ACOs that begin participating in the Shared Savings Program in 2023 (“2023 Starters”) should be allowed to apply for AIPs in 2024. Another commenter suggested that CMS provide an opportunity for 2023 Starters to submit supplemental application materials for AIPs during the first AIP application cycle and, if approved, to receive AIPs for the second and third years of their agreement periods (PY 2024 and PY 2025). According to commenters, implementing such a transitional policy would ensure that 2023 Starters would not delay participation in the Shared Savings Program until 2024 when the AIPs become available.

Multiple commenters recommended that CMS establish a process for inexperienced ACOs that joined prior to 2024 to apply for AIP, including those that began participating before 2023. These commenters suggested that if certain existing ACOs are permitted to apply for AIP, CMS could shorten the period during which funds must be used and repaid to align with the ACO's remaining agreement period, extend the period for using and repaying funds into a second agreement period, or allow an ACO to end its current agreement period early and enter a new 5-year agreement that aligns with the planned AIP timeline.

Response: We are aware of the timing concerns expressed by stakeholders and strive to give ACOs ample time to make decisions that are in the best interest of their patients, providers and organization. The application cycle for AIPs will be conducted annually as part of and in conjunction with the Shared Savings Program application process under § 425.202 with instructions and timeline published through the Shared Savings Program website. While CMS believes that many ACOs currently participating in the Shared Savings Program will have begun to earn shared savings by the time AIP begins in 2024, and therefore, are less likely to need upfront funding, CMS understands the commenters' concerns regarding relatively new, inexperienced ACOs that will not have access to AIPs under this final rule. We may address this concern in future rulemaking.

For the reasons discussed above, we are finalizing our proposed policies without change. AIP supplemental application information would be processed for the first time in CY 2023 for a January 1, 2024 start date, and annually thereafter. The AIP supplemental application information would be submitted as part of the Shared Savings Program application, and we intend to issue subregulatory guidance to support new applicants in completing the supplemental application information, including spend plan development. Specifically, we are adopting as proposed § 425.630(c) and (d). Section 425.630(c) requires an ACO to submit to CMS complete supplemental information as part of its application to participate in the Shared Savings Program; such information must be submitted in the form and manner and by the deadline specified by CMS. Under § 425.630(d)(1), the supplemental application information must be sufficient for CMS to determine whether the ACO is eligible to receive AIPs, and the ACO must submit a spend plan as part of the supplemental application information. Under § 425.630(d)(2), the spend plan must: (1) describe how the ACO will spend its AIPs during the agreement period to build care coordination capabilities, address specific health disparities, and meet other criteria specified in § 425.630; (2) identify the categories of goods and services that will be purchased with AIPs, including the dollar amounts to be spent on the various categories and such other information a may be specified by CMS; and (3) state that the ACO has established a separate designated account for the deposit and expenditure of AIPs. Under § 425.630(d)(3), CMS would review the supplemental application information to determine whether an ACO meets the eligibility criteria and other requirements for advance investment payments and will approve or deny the advance investment payment application accordingly. CMS may review an ACO's spend plan at any time and may require the ACO to modify its spend plan to comply with the requirements of § 425.630.

(4) Use and Management of Payments

Under section § 425.308(b)(4), ACOs are required to publicly report the total proportion of shared savings invested in infrastructure, redesigned care processes, and other resources required to support the goals of better health for populations, better care for individuals, and lower growth in expenditures, including the proportion of shared savings distributed among ACO participants. Although ACOs are required to report this information, our regulations do not require an ACO to spend its shared savings in any particular way. However, given the purpose of AIPs, the fact that they are made before any shared savings are actually earned by an ACO, and our proposed limitations on the recovery of these funds in the absence of any earned shared savings, we proposed at § 425.630(e) to specify how an ACO may use AIPs.

Similar to our experience with AIM, AIPs are intended to provide the means to build the ACO's population health management capabilities, including the provision of accountable care for underserved beneficiaries. AIPs are not intended to sit idle in an investment account or to serve purposes unrelated to the goals of AIPs. We proposed at § 425.630(e) that AIPs must be used to improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to beneficiaries by investing in increased staffing, health care infrastructure, and the provision of accountable care for underserved beneficiaries, which may include addressing social determinants of health. However, as noted in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we emphasized that AIP amounts are advance shared savings, and not payment or reimbursement for items or services under the three specified categories. We proposed that expenditures of AIPs must comply with the beneficiary incentive provision at § 425.304 and all other applicable laws and regulations. The proposal was intended to provide ACOs with flexibility to use payments within three specified categories of allowable uses. We solicited comment on whether there are additional categories of expenses that should be permitted in light of the purposes of AIPs. We noted in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule that we will monitor how ACOs are spending these funds and would revisit these categories in future rulemaking if additional flexibilities or boundaries are required.

As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we recognize that there are many ways to improve population health management and support the provision of accountable care for underserved beneficiaries. The most effective ways will vary by ACO. We believe ACOs know best the needs of their populations and how to use funds to meet program goals. We offered the following examples of permitted uses within the three categories:

Increased staffing. Hiring nurse case managers or other relevant support staff to implement screening for social determinants of health; hiring community health workers, certified peer recovery specialists, other health care professionals with training in delivering culturally and linguistically tailored services; hiring a health equity officer; hiring behavioral health clinicians and case managers to integrate behavioral health treatment into the primary care setting; hiring oral health providers to integrate dental services into the primary care setting; or encouraging partnerships with healthcare systems and local, community-based organizations (such as Area Agencies on Aging, Aging and Disability Resource Centers, and Centers for Independent Living) to increase organizational capacity to identify and address SDOH and connect individuals with culturally and linguistically tailored, accessible health care services, supports, and information at an appropriate literacy level.

SDOH strategies. Examples include developing or securing transportation services; housing-related services to address housing insecurity or homelessness, home or environmental modifications to support a healthy lifestyle, legal aid services to help patients' address social needs, employment-related services, food-related services, utilities-related supports, services to support personal safety, services to reduce social isolation, services to help patients cope with or address financial strain or poverty, patient caregiver supports, providing remote access technologies, telemonitoring, and meals; ensuring individuals are able to access culturally and linguistically tailored, accessible health care services and supports that meet their needs, partnering with community-based organizations to address SDOH needs; or implementing systems to provide and track patient referrals to available community-based social services that assess and address social needs, as well as enable coordination and measurement of health and social care across the community where beneficiaries reside.

Health Care Provider Infrastructure. Examples include investment in certified electronic health record technology (CEHRT) (including system enhancements and upgrades), connections to clinical data registries and networks that support health information exchange across disparate providers and systems involved in patient care, integration of ACO participant systems including tools to share and analyze operational and quality data, remote access technologies, telemonitoring, screening tools, case management or practice management systems to improve care coordination operations across the health and social care continuum, physical accessibility improvements, and tools to further integrate behavioral health or dental services into primary care settings.

In the proposed rule, we elaborated on the permitted and prohibited uses of AIP funds. Similar to AIM, we explained that we intended for advance investment payments to encourage the formation of new ACOs that provide care to underserved beneficiaries, not simply to fund another business venture of an established company or to furnish items or services unrelated to the ACO or the beneficiaries it serves. At § 425.630(e)(2), we proposed that AIPs may not be used for any expense other than allowable uses under proposed § 425.630(e)(1). We provided examples of prohibited uses of AIPs, including management company or parent company profit, performance bonuses, other provider salary augmentation, provision of medical services covered by Medicare, or items or activities unrelated to ACO operations that improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to beneficiaries. We stated that performance bonuses could be tied to the successful implementation of SDOH screenings or care management guidelines, or ACOs could pay a higher salary as necessary to retain a clinician who treats underserved beneficiaries. We solicited comments on these examples of prohibited uses and whether there are additional categories of expenses that should be prohibited in light of the purpose of AIPs. We noted that we would monitor how ACOs are spending AIPs and would revisit allowable uses in future rulemaking if additional flexibilities or boundaries are required.

Additionally, we proposed at § 425.630(e)(2) that an ACO participating in Level E of the BASIC track may not use any advance investment payments to pay back any shared losses that it would have incurred as specified in a written notice from CMS under § 425.605(e)(2). Because Level E is an Advanced APM that must, under § 414.1415(c), involve the acceptance of more than a nominal amount of risk, prohibiting use of AIPs to repay shared losses ensures that an ACO eligible to receive AIPs that is willing to take on such risk remains fully accountable for any shared losses it incurs. To ensure compliance with the standards for use of AIPs, we proposed updating the annual certification requirements under § 425.302(a)(3) to require that the ACO certify that the payments were disbursed only for allowable uses.

We also proposed at § 425.630(e)(4) to require ACOs to segregate AIPs from all other revenues by establishing and maintaining a separate account into which the ACO must immediately deposit all AIPs, and from which all disbursements of such funds are made only for allowable uses. This would allow us to monitor whether the funds are used only for allowable uses and to ensure that AIPs do not pay for any prohibited uses under § 425.630(e)(2). We noted that CMS would deposit AIPs into the same account used for the deposit of shared savings payments; that account must be specified in an ACO's Electronic Funds Transfer form submitted with its application. We proposed that, upon receipt of AIPs, the ACO must immediately deposit the funds into the separate account designated for maintaining AIPs.

We also proposed that the ACO's spend plan must also include a statement that the ACO has established a separate account for the purpose of segregating AIPs. Additionally, we proposed to update our annual certification requirements under § 425.302 by adding new paragraph (a)(3)(iv) to require an ACO to certify at the end of each performance year that it has moved all AIPs received during that performance year into a designated AIP account, where the funds remained until spent as required under § 425.630(d).

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposed provisions regarding the use and management of AIPs and our responses:

Comment: A few commenters considered staffing needs as an appropriate use of AIP funds. One commenter suggested CMS consider modifying the regulatory language for AIP allowable uses (at § 425.630(e)(1)) to permit not only increased staffing, but also investing in training and education for existing staff. A few commenters explained that in healthcare workforce shortage areas, eligible ACOs may face challenges in recruiting additional staff and noted that in these cases, it may be possible for existing staff to be trained and educated to improve the quality and efficiency of services furnished to ACO beneficiaries. One commenter suggested that allowable uses of AIP funds include training opportunities for all staff, not only physicians or advanced practice clinicians, if such training addresses infrastructure needs such as implementation of electronic health records.

Response: We believe that increased staffing may include hiring new staff. We also believe that providing additional training and education to existing staff working with the ACO would constitute an investment in health care provider infrastructure, and therefore, be a permissible use of AIP funds. AIP funding can be used for a wide variety of ACO staffing needs, including health equity officers, peer support specialists, peer recovery specialists, behavioral health clinicians, case managers, community health workers and other health care professionals with training in delivering culturally and linguistically tailored services.

Comment: Many commenters requested that CMS clarify the types of additional staffing that would constitute an appropriate use of AIP funds. Specifically, in response to our preamble reference to hiring “certified peer recovery specialists” (87 FR 46101), commenters noted that “peer support specialists,” as well as peer recovery support specialists, would benefit ACOs in treating beneficiaries with mental health needs. One commenter contended that States certify providers of peer support services for mental health and substance use conditions and the certifications use a variety of terms for peer support personnel. The commenter suggested that CMS work with Medicaid, CHIP and SAMHSA to ensure consistent and inclusive nomenclature that includes all peers who work with beneficiaries with mental health conditions, substance use disorders, or both conditions. Many commenters recommended that CMS specify that hiring both peer support specialists and peer recovery support specialists is a permissible use of AIP funds for mental health and substance use conditions. Additionally, the commenters suggested CMS hold all ACOs accountable for providing integrated behavioral health care.

Response: We appreciate the comments providing examples of how ACOs may consider spending AIPs to enhance staffing, to support behavioral health integration and meet the mental health needs of underserved communities. Our reference in preamble to “certified peer recovery specialists” was merely one example of a permitted use of AIP funds for increased staffing; ACOs can use AIP funds to improve the quality and efficiency of care furnished to beneficiaries by increasing staffing of peer support specialists or other peer support personnel regardless of nomenclature. We agree that behavioral health services are important to an individual's wellbeing and believe that the Shared Savings Program provides ACOs the flexibility to include behavioral health services in their care coordination plans and use AIP funding for these purposes. However, developing a specific methodology for holding all ACOs accountable for providing integrated behavior health care is beyond the scope of this rulemaking.

Comment: A few commenters encouraged CMS to consider allowing physician-led ACOs to use AIPs to pay for retention bonuses of clinical and administrative staff. One commenter contended that independent practices often compete with larger provider networks and hospital systems in attracting and maintaining qualified staff members.

Response: We appreciate the concerns of the commenters and recognize that expanding staffing to better coordinate quality care, especially in underserved communities, would promote program goals and increase ACO participation among provider types. However, after further consideration, we do not believe that the payment of retention bonuses should be an allowable use of AIP funds because of the potential for abuse. We may consider this issue in future rulemaking that would promulgate appropriate safeguards against abuse.

Comment: Some commenters supported CMS proposals to use AIP funding to help close the health equity gap and contended that SDOH are primary drivers of health inequities. Other commenters recognized that CMS is working to reduce health inequalities by implementing SDOH measures in a regulatory program and in implementing AIPs to help support and develop community health partnerships. Commenters identified barriers to successful care coordination such as, insufficient community resources and capacity for care referrals in the community. Commenters suggested that CMS consider incentivizing (or requiring) ACOs to invest a portion of their AIPs in community resources where they are most needed, aligned with their decile (for example, ACOs in ADI decile 1-2 must spend 5 percent on community resources, whereas those in deciles 9-10 must spend 25 percent). One commenter requested that CMS allow AIP funds to be used to maintain an up-to-date community resource inventory and noted that clinical practices often struggle to partner with community-based organizations because they lack the technological, human, or other infrastructure required to deliver sufficient services or enter into contractual arrangements with ACOs. Other commenters contended that screening for social needs requires new workflows, dedicated and trained staff capable of engaging and navigating patients to resources, and partnerships with community-based organizations.

Response: ACOs can use AIP funding to assist in developing new strategies to identify underserved beneficiaries and connect them to additional resources such as housing and food security. In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule we identified many areas for the appropriate use of AIP funds in addressing social needs, as well as enabling coordination of healthcare and social services across the community. We disagree with the commenters who advocated that CMS should incentivize or require ACOs to invest a portion of their AIPs in community resources where they are most needed. We prefer to establish fundamental parameters for the use of AIP funds and to permit ACOs to have the discretion to decide how the funds can be best used to improve the quality and efficiency of care in the communities they serve. Although CMS is granting ACOs discretion regarding the use of AIPs funds to meet the needs of underserved communities, we reserve the right to review any ACO SDOH strategies as part of the spend plan to determine whether the use of AIP funds to implement such strategies would constitute a prohibited use of AIP funds. If CMS finds that an ACO's planned spending on SDOH will not (or is unlikely to) improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to beneficiaries, we would require the ACO to make changes to the strategy.

As explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46102), where we refer to community-based organizations, we mean public or private not-for-profit entities that provide specific services to the community or targeted populations in the community to address the health and social needs of those populations. They may include community-action agencies, housing agencies, area agencies on aging, or other non-profits that apply for grants to perform social services. They may receive grants from other agencies in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, including Federal grants administered by the Administration for Children and Families (ACF), Administration for Community Living (ACL), the Centers for Disease Control, or other State-funded grants to provide social services. Generally, we believe such organizations know the populations they serve and their communities, and may have the infrastructure or systems in place to help coordinate supportive services that address social determinants of health or serve as a source with which to share information. We recognize that ACOs wishing to address social needs may want to make investments that would enable their ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers to work with community-based organizations that have expertise in identifying and providing the types of social services that the ACO's beneficiary population requires.

The Shared Savings Program does not prohibit ACOs from partnering with community-based organizations. Currently, if a community-based organization is enrolled in Medicare, it may already be an ACO participant or an ACO provider or supplier. We believe community-based organizations could play an important role in identifying and addressing gaps in health equity. We hope to encourage more ACOs to partner with community-based organizations whether they provide items and services reimbursed by Medicare or not. We recognize that Federal and other sources of grant funding for social services may be insufficient to fully address the demand for services within a community or broader geography. To meet this demand, contractual arrangements between the health care sector and community-based organizations providing social services have increased in recent years.

Comment: One commenter recommended that CMS clarify that AIP funds could be used to invest in partnerships with community-based providers, including community pharmacies, and support beneficiary access to pharmacy settings where they may be connected with additional services. The commenter contended that 90 percent of Americans live within 5 miles of a pharmacy and pharmacists are viewed as one of the most trusted providers. The commenter asserted that partnerships between ACOs and pharmacies/pharmacists can strengthen access to the delivery of patient-centered care.

Response: The comment did not specifically describe the nature of the “investments” for which AIP funds might be used. We do not believe that it is appropriate or necessary to use AIPs—an advance payment of shared savings with Trust Fund dollars that should be repaid—to obtain an ownership or investment interest in a provider, supplier, or pharmacy. Depending on the circumstances, an ACO may use AIP funds to enable a community-based provider, supplier, or pharmacy to improve the quality and efficiency of care furnished to beneficiaries by investing in increased staffing, health care infrastructure, and the provision of accountable care for underserved beneficiaries. We note that any such arrangement must comply with all applicable laws and regulations, including the fraud and abuse laws.

Comment: Many commenters encouraged CMS to revise the beneficiary incentive provision at § 425.304(a)(2) to expressly state that nothing in § 425.304 shall be construed as prohibiting an ACO from using AIPs to cover the cost of a beneficiary incentive furnished pursuant to § 425.304(b) or (c). Section 425.304(a)(2) currently states that nothing in § 425.304 shall be construed as prohibiting an ACO from using shared savings to cover the cost of a beneficiary incentive furnished pursuant to § 425.304(b) or (c).

Response: We recognize that beneficiary incentives can be used to provide accountable care for underserved beneficiaries and may thereby constitute an allowable use of AIPs, provided that the incentive is furnished in a manner that complies with the beneficiary incentive provision at § 425.304 and other applicable laws and regulations. Because AIPs are advance payments of shared savings, we do not see any need to modify § 425.304(a)(2) in the manner suggested by the commenter.

Comment: Several commenters supported CMS proposals to include infrastructure as an appropriate use of AIPs, noting that independent provider practices serve rural areas and often do not have the infrastructure or technology needed to financially support transitioning to electronic health records (EHRs), and the reporting and sharing of health data. These commenters noted that this type of investment would encourage smaller practices to participate in value-based contracting. One commenter expressed concern about how much funding would trickle down to the individual participating practices and suggested that CMS have guidelines in place to make certain funds are allocated properly across ACO administration, as well as individual practice clinical functions. One commenter contended that AIPs would improve health technology and standardized utilization of patient-facing technology, and healthcare organizations and technology vendors would have an incentive to invest in mechanisms to track performance and improve over time. One commenter noted that AIPs could be leveraged to develop infrastructure that would enhance sociodemographic data collection, develop targeted interventions to reduce health disparities, and develop relationships with community-based organizations to address social needs.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' support. We believe that the use of AIPs to foster connections and integration between primary care practices, facilities, clinical data registries will likely improve case management and care coordination across the continuum of care, and thereby improve quality care and improved health outcomes for beneficiaries. We decline to mandate a particular allocation of funds between ACO administration and individual practice clinical functions because we believe ACOs should have discretion to decide how the funds can be best for allowable purposes consistent with the parameters set forth in this final rule. Regarding investments in networks that support health information exchange, as discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we encourage ACOs to review the request for information in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule regarding the recently released Trusted Exchange Framework and Common Agreement or TEFCA, 255 which included discussion about how connecting to entities exchanging information under TEFCA could help to support health information exchange for a variety of use cases that may be relevant to ACOs.

255 For more information, see https://www.healthit.gov/topic/interoperability/trusted-exchange-framework-and-common-agreement-tefca .

Comment: Many commenters noted that the AIPs would not provide enough resources to help FQHC-led ACOs acquire the necessary health IT to build analytics and care coordination infrastructure at the ACO and individual health center level. The commenters noted that FQHCs experience different challenges from other safety-net providers when transitioning into value-based care models based on FQHC statutory reimbursement requirements under the Prospective Payment System (PPS). Commenters contended that health centers need flexible funding to build capacity at the provider level for care coordination, chronic disease management, and screening for social determinants of health. Commenters requested permitting ACOs to transfer AIPs to FQHC participants to support building the appropriate infrastructure and workforce to support sustainability.

Response: We believe that the proposed allowable uses criteria provides enough flexibility for ACOs to determine the best way to support the needs of their beneficiaries seeking care at facilities participating in the ACO, which may include contributing towards health IT used by FQHCs if such support is structured to comply with the fraud and abuse laws and all other applicable laws and regulations.

Comment: A few commenters noted that rural health centers (RHCs) are well-suited to lead care coordination and address social determinants of health on behalf of their ACOs. Commenters requested CMS to allow AIPs to flow into RHCs and provide essential funding for them to grow with the ACO. Specifically, the commenters advocated that CMS amend the allowable uses for AIPs to explicitly permit ACOs to use AIPs for costs that may be incurred by an RHC's employees, contractors, and participating providers.

Response: This final rule does not prohibit ACOs from using AIP funds to improve care coordination for beneficiaries who receive care at an RHC or to enhance IT infrastructure used by RHCs. We do not believe it is necessary to finalize any changes to the proposed allowable uses provision at § 425.630(e)(1). We note that any financial relationship between an ACO and an ACO participant that involves AIP funding must be structured to comply with all applicable laws and regulations, including the fraud and abuse laws.

Comment: We received several supportive comments on CMS' proposal on the use of AIP funds to improve care for beneficiaries residing in underserved communities and to encourage participation from new ACOs by defraying the start-up costs of forming an ACO. Generally, commenters found that AIPs support ACOs in partnering with community healthcare providers and in meeting the needs of historically underserved beneficiaries. Commenters noted that improving provider infrastructure, increasing staffing, and addressing beneficiaries' social and other health needs would improve care quality and beneficiary outcomes.

Some commenters explained that AIPs would mitigate and reduce many barriers to participation and encourage improvements in care delivery redesign, including infrastructure, staffing and social supports, to better address beneficiary needs. One commenter was supportive that AIPs may be used to cover costs associated with building new local networks that involve community-based-organizations and recommended employing a broad definition of allowable costs devoted to building those networks, including the transaction costs inherent in building new partnerships. Another commenter encouraged CMS to consider requiring ACOs that obtain such incentives to apply a portion of such incentives to help build the nursing facility health-information technology infrastructure interoperability capabilities.

Response: As we stated in our CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, it is our intent to offer flexibility in how ACOs use AIPs to meet the greatest needs of their patients. We agree with commenters that investing in infrastructure is an appropriate use of AIPs, and any such investments directed to a community-based organization or a nursing facility operating under an ACO participant agreement would need to comply with all applicable laws and regulations, including the fraud and abuse laws.

Comment: One commenter requested that CMS clarify the specific examples of allowable AIP uses and provide detailed guidance and additional examples of what would constitute a prohibited use of AIP.

Response: We have provided some additional guidance on the proper use of AIP funds in response to other comments. We are committed to furnishing additional subregulatory program guidance on the allowable and prohibited uses of AIP, which may be informed by the experience we gain in reviewing and monitoring ACO spend plans and ACO use of AIP funds.

After considering the public comments, we are finalizing without change at § 425.630(e) our proposed policies for the use and management of AIPs. Specifically, we are finalizing as proposed new § 425.630(e)(1), which requires an ACO to use AIPs to improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to beneficiaries by investing in increased staffing, health care infrastructure, and the provision of accountable care for underserved beneficiaries, which may include addressing SDOH. Section 425.630(e)(1) further provides that an ACO's expenditures of AIPs must comply with the beneficiary incentive provision at § 425.304 and all other applicable laws and regulations, including the provision at § 425.630(e)(2) regarding prohibited uses of AIPs. Under § 425.630(e)(2), AIPs may not be used for any expense other than an allowable use under § 425.630(e)(1), and in the case of an ACO participating in Level E of the BASIC track, AIPs may not be used for the repayment of shared losses by ACOs participating in Level E of the BASIC track. We are also finalizing at § 425.630(e)(4) the requirement that ACOs segregate AIPs from all other revenues by establishing and maintaining a separate account for these funds.

(5) Advance Investment Payment Methodology

In AIM, prepaid shared savings included an upfront payment of $250,000 and a one-time payment of $36 per beneficiary, followed by a monthly payment of $8 per beneficiary per month for the first 2 performance years of an AIM ACO's agreement period. According to the AIM evaluation, AIM ACO leadership conveyed through interviews and the ACO Web survey that they wanted to join the Shared Savings Program to gain experience in delivering value-based care and remain independent, and that AIM funds were critical to building the infrastructure needed to implement their ACOs. 256 The evaluation also found that these new AIM ACOs consistently demonstrated greater reductions in key Medicare spending categories and related utilization compared to similar non-AIM Shared Savings Program ACOs. 257 Furthermore, there were greater reductions in all components of Medicare spending examined, including acute inpatient hospitalizations, outpatient visits, skilled nursing facility care, and home health use. The evaluation did not find reductions in Medicare spending and utilization to be offset by reductions in the quality of care provided or patient and caregiver experiences.

256 Abt Associates, Evaluation of the Accountable Care Organization Investment Model Final Report 20 (Sep. 2020), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/data-and-reports/2020/aim-final-annrpt .

257 Ibid.

We proposed to provide an ACO that CMS determines meets the eligibility criteria described in section III.G.2.a.(2) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46099 and 46100) with AIPs during the first 2 performance years of the ACO's participation agreement. We proposed that AIPs are comprised of two types of payments: a one-time payment of $250,000 and eight quarterly payments based on the number of assigned beneficiaries, capped at 10,000 beneficiaries.

The proposed $250,000 one-time payment is informed by the AIM payment structure, which offered a $250,000 upfront fixed payment to new AIM ACO participants starting in the Shared Savings Program in 2015 and 2016. Under the model, the upfront fixed payment reflected the estimated upfront investment requirements to establish ACOs. We proposed a $250,000 one-time AIP because, as explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46103), we believe that such a payment would similarly support an ACO in addressing the upfront investment requirements for a new, low revenue and inexperienced ACO to join the Shared Savings Program. We noted that we have experience with a fixed $250,000 upfront payment from AIM, which served ACOs that are similar in many ways to ACOs that would be served by the proposed AIPs. Furthermore, we believe that initial ACO start-up costs do not vary significantly by the size of an ACO or by the underlying level of risk of an assigned beneficiary population. However, we noted that we are considering alternative values of the one-time payment, such as allowing the one-time payment to vary by ACO based on the number of assigned beneficiaries, the risk factors of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population, or both. We sought comment on the proposal to provide ACOs with a one-time payment of $250,000, as well as these alternatives.

The quarterly payments are informed by our experience in AIM where ACO participants had variable costs for clinical care management activities, such as clinical staff, which were supported by the per beneficiary per month payments offered to them in the model.

We proposed to make payments on a quarterly basis to balance providing ACOs with predictable cash flow to participate in the Shared Savings Program and simplifying operations for CMS. We noted that we considered other options for the frequency of the payments, such as monthly payments as were tested in AIM, or annual payments. Making more frequent payments, such as on a monthly basis, would result in additional operational burden for CMS because we would need to calculate the payments more frequently. Because the Shared Savings Program operates on a larger scale than AIM did, the burden of administering monthly advance payments is not feasible. Moreover, we believe that monthly payments offer little additional benefit to ACOs relative to quarterly payments. We did not propose a single annual payment as we believe the benefit to ACOs of consistent payments on a quarterly basis outweighs the administrative costs of calculating quarterly payments. We sought comment on the proposed schedule of the AIPs to ACOs.

We proposed to determine the value of an ACO's upcoming quarterly payment amount prior to the start of the quarter based on the latest available assignment list for the performance year (see Table 51). We noted that we believe it is important to use the latest available assignment list because under current regulation the individual beneficiaries assigned to the ACO may change between annual and quarterly assignment runs. For ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation as described at § 425.400(a)(2), the assignment list is updated quarterly based on the most recent 12 months of data. For ACOs under prospective assignment as described at § 425.400(a)(3), the assignment list is updated quarterly to exclude beneficiaries that meet any of the exclusion criteria during the performance year. Therefore, we noted that we believe that using the latest available assignment list to determine the upcoming quarterly payment will best reflect the attributes of the ACO's assigned population.

We also noted that we considered an alternative proposal for the timing of the quarterly payments calculation. Under this alternative, we would determine the ACO's quarterly payment at the start of the performance year based on the beneficiaries assigned to the ACO at the beginning of a performance year. The quarterly payment amount determined at the beginning of a performance year could remain fixed for the duration of that performance year. The total payments ACOs would receive over the course of a performance year would be known by the ACO at the start of that performance year. However, this alternative would also carry the risk that CMS would underpay or overpay an ACO relative to an approach of redetermining the quarterly payment amount prior to the start of each quarter. We sought comment on this alternative proposal.

We proposed that the quarterly payments made to ACOs would be equal to the sum of per beneficiary payments for up to 10,000 beneficiaries. The per beneficiary payment amount would vary for each beneficiary based on a risk factors-based score that we would calculate for the beneficiary. The risk factors-based score would be informed by the beneficiary's dual eligibility status and the ADI national percentile ranking of the census block group of the beneficiary's primary address, described in further detail later in this section. The quarterly payments reflect expected variable ongoing operating costs that are related to the number and risk factors of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries.

We proposed to add a new § 425.630(f) to establish the frequency and payment methodology for AIPs (87 FR 46104). Specifically, we proposed a one-time payment for ACOs at or near the beginning of PY 1 of the ACO's agreement period. Quarterly payments would be made each quarter for the first 2 performance years of the ACO's agreement period. As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we would complete the following steps to calculate the ACO's quarterly payment amount:

• Step 1: Determine the ACO's assigned beneficiary population. The assigned beneficiaries used in determining the quarterly payment amount would be the beneficiaries most recently assigned to the ACO under § 425.400(a)(2) (for ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation) or § 425.400(a)(3) (for ACOs under prospective assignment), based on the certified ACO participant list for the relevant performance year.

• Step 2: Assign each beneficiary a risk factors-based score. For each beneficiary in the assigned population identified in Step 1, CMS would do the following:

+ + If the beneficiary is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, assign a risk factors-based score of 100. 258

258 A beneficiary is considered dually eligible if they were dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid in any of the 12 months that correspond with the window used for assigning beneficiaries under the preliminary prospective assignment methodology. The 12-month window is described in further detail elsewhere in this section.

+ + If the beneficiary is not dually eligible, assign a risk factors-based score equal to the ADI national percentile rank of the census block group corresponding with the beneficiary's primary mailing address.

+ + If the beneficiary is not dually eligible but cannot be matched with an ADI national percentile rank due to insufficient data, impute a risk factors-based score of 50. 259

259 The imputed score of 50 is described in further detail elsewhere in this section.

• Step 3: Determine a beneficiary's payment amount. For each beneficiary in the assigned population, CMS would determine the payment amount that corresponds to the beneficiary's risk factors-based score according to the per beneficiary payment amounts specified by CMS elsewhere in this section (refer to Table 53).

• Step 4: Calculate the ACO's total quarterly payment amount. The ACO's quarterly payment amount would be the sum of the payment amounts corresponding to each assigned beneficiary's risk factors-based score, capped at 10,000 beneficiaries. If the ACO has more than 10,000 assigned beneficiaries, CMS would calculate the quarterly payment amount based on the 10,000 assigned beneficiaries with the highest risk factors-based scores.

As described earlier, a goal of AIPs is to reduce financial barriers for new, low revenue and inexperienced ACOs to join the Shared Savings Program. In addition to bringing ACOs into the program, as part of the Agency's goals to advance health equity, we are interested in using the AIPs to support ACOs in improving the care received by underserved beneficiaries. We believe that we will further the Agency's goal to advance health equity by basing the ACO's quarterly payment amount on the sum of per beneficiary payments that vary by a beneficiary's risk factors-based score, as informed by the ADI national percentile rank of the beneficiary's census block group and the beneficiary's dual eligibility status. We believe the ADI national percentile rank of the beneficiary's census block group and dual eligibility are good indicators of beneficiaries with high needs. The ADI measure is intended to capture local socioeconomic factors correlated with medical disparities and underservice, while the beneficiary level measure of dual eligibility is intended to capture socioeconomic challenges that could affect a beneficiary's ability to access care.

The ADI was developed by researchers at the National Institutes of Health with the goal of quantifying and comparing social disadvantage across geographic neighborhoods. It is a composite measure derived through a combination of 17 input variables from census data. For the 2019 ADI, the 17 input variables across four domains are shown in Table 52.

The ADI is calculated at the census block group level through the US Census Bureau's American Community Survey. Census blocks, the smallest geographic area for which the Bureau of the Census collects and tabulates decennial census data, are formed by streets, roads, railroads, streams and other bodies of water, other visible physical and cultural features, and the legal boundaries shown on Census Bureau maps. A census block group is the next level above census blocks in the geographic hierarchy and is a combination of census blocks that is a subdivision of a census tract or block numbering area. The census block group typically contains 600 to 3,000 people and is the smallest geographic entity for which the decennial census tabulates and publishes sample data. Files containing the ADI of U.S. census block groups is publicly available through the Neighborhood Atlas from the University of Wisconsin. 260 It is a relative measure that is reported at the individual block group level, typically reported by nationwide percentile (1-100) or Statewide decile (1-10), with a higher percentile indicating greater disadvantage. The relative measure reported at the census block group level is referred to as the ADI national percentile rank.

260 The ADI data files are publicly available for download at https://www.neighborhoodatlas.medicine.wisc.edu/ .

We proposed to use the ADI national percentile rank for the census block group in which a beneficiary resides for that beneficiary's risk factors-based score if the beneficiary is not dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. Specifically, we proposed to establish the ADI national percentile rank of the beneficiary's census block group derived from the beneficiary's latest mailing address in CMS data systems at the time of the calculation. Furthermore, we proposed to use the most recently available version of the ADI. At the time of issuing the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, the latest version available was the 2019 ADI which was based on the 2015-2019 ACS Five Year Estimates. The ADI data files are publicly available for download at https://www.neighborhoodatlas.medicine.wisc.edu/ .

We proposed to use the beneficiary's dual eligibility status to inform the risk factors-based score. Specifically, we proposed that if a beneficiary is dually eligible, the beneficiary's risk factors-based score would be 100 (87 FR 46105). A score of 100 would ensure that the ACO receives the maximum payment amount for each beneficiary dually enrolled in Medicare and Medicaid, which would further the Agency's goal to ensure beneficiaries with dual eligibility have full access to seamless, high quality health care.

To determine a beneficiary's dual eligibility status, we explained that we would consider the beneficiary's enrollment status in each month of a 12-month window (87 FR 46105). The 12- month window would correspond with the assignment window used for preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation for that particular assignment run. For example, we proposed to use PY1 Quarter 1 assignment to inform the quarterly payment we would make to the ACO in July of PY1; the preliminary prospective assignment window for that assignment run would be April 1 of the prior calendar year through March 30 of the current calendar year. We explained as a result that we would consider the beneficiary's dual eligibility status in each of those 12 months. If a beneficiary had zero months of dual enrollment, we would consider the beneficiary not dually enrolled. If the beneficiary had at least one month of dual enrollment in Medicare and Medicaid, we would consider the beneficiary dually enrolled.

We considered alternatives to assigning 100 points to the beneficiary for dual eligibility status (87 FR 46105 and 46106). One alternative we considered was to calculate a beneficiary's risk factors-based score as the sum of the ADI national percentile rank of the beneficiary's census block group and 25 points if the beneficiary is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. As explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, the maximum risk factors-based score would be 125, and we would revise the payment amount ranges to account for a higher maximum score. We also explained that we considered 25 points for dual status because through preliminary analysis we observed that the median ADI score for the population that was aligned to Direct Contracting Entities in PY 2021 was 42 with a standard deviation of 25. Furthermore, given the fact that the ADI score is a variable value and the bonus points for dual eligibility status would be fixed at 25 points, we noted that the relative weight of the 25 points would be lower for beneficiaries living in a relatively highly deprived area and higher for beneficiaries in a relatively advantaged area. For example, consider one dually eligible beneficiary and one non-dually eligible beneficiary, both living in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of 50 (the U.S. median). The dually eligible beneficiary would receive a risk factors-based score of 75 (50 plus 25), which is 50 percent higher than the risk factors-based score of the non-dually eligible beneficiary. For a dually eligible beneficiary who lives in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of 70 (more deprived than the median), 25 points would increase their score by 36 percent. There are many people who do not qualify for Medicaid but still face systemic and structural barriers to care. Therefore, as discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we noted that we believe it would be reasonable to add a relatively moderate bonus to the beneficiary's ADI national percentile rank to calculate a combined risk factors-based score that values both dual status and other structural barriers to care that also may require upfront investments by an ACO to help their assigned beneficiaries overcome. We sought comment on an alternative proposal to calculate the beneficiary's risk factors-based score by taking the sum of the ADI national percentile rank where the beneficiary lives and 25 points if the beneficiary is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

We proposed per beneficiary payment amounts that increase as a beneficiary's risk factors-based score increases (87 FR 46106). The per beneficiary payment amounts by range are shown in Table 53. A dually eligible beneficiary would receive a risk factors-based score of 100, which corresponds to a quarterly payment amount of $45. A beneficiary not dually eligible and residing in a census block group with an ADI in the 75th percentile would receive a risk factors-based score of 75 which corresponds to a quarterly payment amount of $40.

We calibrated the per beneficiary payment amounts against the distribution of risk factors-based scores for beneficiaries assigned to ACOs in PY 2020, such that the average ACO participating in PY2020 would have received approximately the same payment value across 2 performance years as the average ACO that participated in AIM (87 FR 46106). The payments would begin at $20 and would be scaled upward by increments of 4-5 dollars as the risk factors-based score increases. We proposed that a beneficiary with a risk factors-based score of less than 25 would have a corresponding payment of $0, as a goal of the AIPs option is to encourage formation of new ACOs that serve underserved beneficiaries. A beneficiary risk factors-based score of less than 25 would indicate that the beneficiary is not dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid and is residing in a census block group with low area deprivation. We proposed that any beneficiary with a risk factors-based score of 85 or higher would receive the maximum payment of $45. As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, these beneficiaries either have dual eligibility or reside in a census block group with high area deprivation; we consider beneficiaries with these factors to represent the highest need for upfront investments in care coordination interventions by ACOs. As we gain more experience with AIPs, we would reevaluate the effectiveness of the payment amounts in Table 53 and may propose modifications in future rulemaking.

We proposed to calculate the quarterly payment as the sum of the per beneficiary payment amounts corresponding to each assigned beneficiary, capped at 10,000 beneficiaries. The proposed 10,000 beneficiary cap is similar to what was tested in AIM. We noted that we believe a cap is necessary to insulate the Trust Funds from making extremely large quarterly payments to large ACOs. Also similar to AIM, we proposed that if an ACO has more than 10,000 assigned beneficiaries, we would calculate the quarterly payment based on the 10,000 assigned beneficiaries with the highest risk factors-based scores, which would maximize the quarterly payment for the ACO.

We proposed under the new § 425.630(f) that CMS would notify in writing each ACO of its determination of the amount of AIP. If CMS does not make any AIP, the notice would specify the reason(s) why and inform the ACO of its right to request reconsideration review in accordance with the standards specified in subpart I of our regulations. Thus, with each quarterly payment we proposed to provide the ACO with a report that shows our calculation of the ACO's quarterly payment amount, including the risk factors-based score we assigned to each beneficiary used as part of the calculation, and the per beneficiary payment that corresponds to that score.

We noted that we considered alternative methodologies to calculating an ACO's quarterly payment (87 FR 46106 and 46107). We also noted that we considered an approach of determining an ACO's average risk factors-based score based on all of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries. That is, we would take the sum of the risk factors-based scores for each of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries and divide by the total number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries. In this alternative, ACOs with an average risk factors-based score above the median would have their per beneficiary payment amount scaled upward and those with an average risk factors-based score below the median would have their per beneficiary payment amount scaled downward. An ACO with an average risk factors-based score of the median would have their per beneficiary payment amount set to $30. An ACO with an average risk factors-based score greater than the median would have their per beneficiary payment amount increased by the percentage difference of the score compared to the median. For example, if the median is 50, an ACO with an average risk factors-based score of 70 would have their per beneficiary payment amount increased by 20 percent to $36 and an ACO with an average risk factors-based score of 32 would have their per beneficiary payment amount reduced by 18 percent to $24.60. The quarterly payment would equal the per beneficiary per quarter payment amount multiplied by the number of assigned beneficiaries, capped at 10,000 beneficiaries. This alternative approach would allow us to consider the risk factors-based scores of all of an ACO's assigned beneficiaries, not only the 10,000 assigned beneficiaries with the highest risk factors-based scores, in determining the ACO's quarterly payment. We sought comment on this alternative methodology.

We also noted that we considered an alternative proposal to identify underserved beneficiaries based on whether their mailing address is located in a Health Professional Shortage Area (HPSA) for primary care instead of the beneficiary's mailing address' ADI percentile rank (87 FR 46107). As part of the Health Resources and Services Administration's (HRSA) cooperative agreement with the State Primary Care Offices, the State Primary Care Offices conduct needs assessment in their States, determine what areas are eligible for designations, and submit designation applications to HRSA. HRSA reviews the HPSA applications submitted by the State Primary Care Offices, and—if they meet the designation eligibility criteria for the type of HPSA the application is for—designates a HPSA. HPSAs are defined under section 332(a) of the Public Health Service Act. HPSA designations identify geographic areas, population groups, or facilities within the United States that are experiencing a shortage of health care professionals. Geographic HPSAs are defined as having a shortage of provider services for the entire population within an established geographic area; population HPSAs, in which there is a shortage of providers services for a specific population subset within an established geographic area; and facility HPSAs, that include certain categories of facilities. HRSA is responsible for making these HPSA designations in accordance with section 332(a) of the Public Health Service Act. Under this alternative, the risk factor-based score would be based on the sum of points assigned based on whether an assigned beneficiary is residing in an area designated as a geographic HPSA, as determined by the beneficiary's mailing address, and whether a beneficiary is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. As a result, there would be three different per beneficiary payment amounts based on whether an assigned beneficiary is: (1) both residing in a geographic HPSA and dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid; (2) residing in a geographic HPSA only; or (3) dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid only. Under this alternative, we discussed that we would not provide a per beneficiary payment amount if the assigned beneficiary is not in a geographic HPSA and not dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. As noted in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we believe the ADI metric can support identification of beneficiaries who face a variety of social determinants to health, not only health provider shortages, we proposed to use ADI. We sought comment on an alternative methodology of using HPSA scores.

We also discussed that we considered an alternative methodology that additionally considers whether a beneficiary is enrolled in the Medicare Part D low-income subsidy (LIS) when CMS calculates the quarterly payment amount. 261 In this alternative, the risk factors-based score would be equal to the assigned beneficiary's ADI national percentile or 100 points if the beneficiary is enrolled in the Medicare Part D LIS or is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. We sought comment on this alternative methodology.

261 The low-income subsidy helps people with Medicare pay for prescription drugs, and lowers the costs of Medicare prescription drug coverage. For more information about the LIS, refer to https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prescription-Drug-Coverage/LimitedIncomeandResources .

As explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46107), there are circumstances where a beneficiary may not have an ADI national percentile rank. In the cases where Medicare beneficiaries have a missing or partial address in our database, we would not be able to match them with a census block group. In a preliminary review of Medicare beneficiary information, less than 2 percent of beneficiaries could not be matched to a census block group due to missing or insufficient mailing address data. Additionally, under the ADI methodology approximately 2 percent of U.S. census block groups do not receive an ADI national percentile rank due to data suppression criteria. These suppression criteria include: fewer than 100 people, fewer than 30 housing units, or more than 33 percent of the population living in group quarters or missing core component variables. In our preliminary review of Medicare beneficiary information, approximately 1 percent of Medicare beneficiaries had sufficient address data, but were in a U.S. census block group without a national percentile rank due to data suppression criteria. For beneficiaries with no ADI national percentile rank due to missing or insufficient mailing address data or data suppression criteria, and are not automatically receiving a score of 100 for being a beneficiary who is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, we proposed to impute a value of 50 in place of the ADI national percentile rank for the purposes of determining an assigned beneficiary's risk factors-based score and per beneficiary payment amount. As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, an imputed ADI ranking of 50 corresponds to the average national ADI ranking and would be the most neutral imputed value. This would avoid biasing an ACO's payments in either direction due to missing information. We sought comment on the proposal to impute a value in place of the ADI national percentile rank to address missing beneficiary information when calculating the risk factors-based score.

To summarize, we proposed to provide an ACO with a one-time payment of $250,000 prior to the start of the ACO's first performance year. We also proposed to calculate an ACO's upcoming quarterly payment prior to the start of the quarter, using the latest available assignment list. We noted that we would calculate an ACO's quarterly payment amount based on risk factors-based scores of up to 10,000 beneficiaries assigned to the ACO prior to the start of the performance year, and ACOs with more than 10,000 beneficiaries would have a quarterly payment calculated based on the 10,000 beneficiaries assigned to the ACO with the highest risk factors-based scores. We proposed to assign a risk factors-based score for each beneficiary using the ADI national percentile rank of the beneficiary's census block group or assigning 100 points if the beneficiary is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. We proposed to impute a value of 50 in place of an ADI national percentile rank if the beneficiary is not dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid and cannot be matched with an ADI national percentile rank due to insufficient data. Finally, we proposed dollar value amounts that vary by risk factors-based score, in that the amounts gradually increase as the risk factors-based score increases. We sought comment on each of these proposals.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposed advance investment payment methodology and our responses:

Comment: Most commenters expressed general support for and appreciation of the advance investment payment option.

Response: We thank the commenters for their support.

Comment: A number of commenters weighed in on the amount of the $250,000 upfront payment proposed, the amount of proposed quarterly payments, or total amount of advance investment payments generally. One commenter stated they support the proposed payment amounts for calculating the ACO's quarterly payment, stating the amount appropriately provide additional funding for ACOs treating beneficiaries with greater levels of need. Another commenter suggested that if CMS were to expand eligibility for the advance investment payments option to high revenue ACOs, payment rates that make up the ACO's quarterly payment could be halved for high revenue ACOs. MedPAC urged CMS to adopt CMS' alternative to calculate an ACO's average risk factors-based score and make the ACO's upfront $250,000 payment contingent upon the ACO reaching a minimum average risk factors-based score (such as 25). In such a scenario, an ACO with an average risk factors-based score of less than 25 across all its assigned beneficiaries would not receive upfront or quarterly payments.

Several commenters disagreed with the amount of advance investment payments proposed by CMS. One commenter stated that they question the adequacy of the initial and quarterly payments, suggesting they may not be enough to meaningfully encourage participation while meeting the various resource needs of beneficiaries, and that the payments' benefit would be limited when spread over the size of the entire ACO. Several expressed concern that the amount is the same as the upfront payment made under AIM and does not account for inflation or increased health care costs.

Commenters offered various suggestions for increasing the total amount of advance investment payments. One commenter encouraged CMS to increase the quarterly payments to account for at least the highest risk 20,000 beneficiaries rather than the proposed 10,000. A few commenters suggested increasing the value of the upfront payment for ACOs in certain areas, by using a health equity factor based on the ADI to determine if the ACO would be eligible for a higher upfront payment. One commenter suggested doubling the upfront payment amount and extending the duration of upfront payments to yearly for 3 to 5 years, indicating that this would result in a more sustainable model. Another commenter suggested increasing the quarterly payment per-beneficiary amounts by modeling the payment amounts off Innovation Center models that provide monthly per-beneficiary payments, such as the Primary Care First Model or the Maryland Total Cost of Care Model. A number of commenters suggested that CMS increase the amount of the upfront payment, with many arguing it would be a means of attracting safety net providers and supporting infrastructure investments. Several other commenters suggested that $250,000 should be the minimum upfront payment and CMS should increase the upfront payment amount based on the size and risk profile of the ACO.

Response: We do not agree with the commenter's suggestion to provide half of the advance investment payments amount to high revenue ACOs. As we explain in III.G.2.a.(2) of this final rule, providing advance investment payments to high revenue ACOs would be counter to the purpose of advance investment payments. High revenue ACOs are likely to have more ready access to capital for the necessary upfront investments than new, low revenue ACOs.

With respect to MedPAC's suggestion to further limit payments for new, low revenue ACOs inexperienced with performance-based risk that do not reach a minimum average risk factors-based score, while we are not modifying the proposed methodology in this final rule, will continue to consider this approach and may revisit it in future rulemaking.

At this time, we disagree with commenters' requests that we increase the amount of the upfront payment or recalibrate the quarterly payments to increase the total amounts made available to ACOs over the course of the agreement period in which they are receiving advance investment payments. As we discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46106), we believe it is necessary to insulate the Trust Funds from making extremely large quarterly payments to large ACOs. We also considered the ability of newly formed ACOs to spend funding in a short time period, drawing on lessons from AIM. We calibrated the payment amounts such that we expect the average ACO to receive approximately $2.5 million in advance investment payments over their first 2 performance years, an amount similar to the largest amount an ACO that participated in AIM received. Additionally, in the first 2 years of AIM, we recouped about 46 percent of the total upfront amounts paid. Based on this prior experience, we believe the $2.5 million estimated average does not overburden ACOs with an overwhelming amount that could remain outstanding for many future years and increases the likelihood CMS is able to recoup the majority of the AIP provided in a relatively short period of time.

We do not agree with the suggestion to modify our proposal to increase the value of the upfront payment for ACOs based on a health equity factor or based on size of the ACO. Under our proposal, the first payment the ACO will receive will be equal to the fixed $250,000 upfront payment plus the first quarterly payment which itself is already based on such factors. Therefore, the first payments received by the ACO will be greater than $250,000 and will vary depending on the risk factors of beneficiaries initially assigned to the ACO and the size of the ACO.

We also do not agree we should modify our proposal to align more closely with the per beneficiary payment amounts found in other Innovation Center models such as Primary Care First and the Maryland Total Cost of Care Model. The advance investment payments option under the Shared Savings Program is designed for a different purpose. Unlike the per beneficiary amounts in those Innovation Center models, the advance investment payments are not intended to serve as care management fees for individual beneficiaries, but rather are intended to provide the ACO with upfront capital to make investments in systems, processes or interventions that are expected to yield lower cost and higher quality of care for their assigned beneficiary population. We believe that the payment amounts as proposed will serve to attract safety-net providers to the Shared Savings Program and will support infrastructure investments, however, we intend to monitor the uptake of this option and the ability of participating ACOs to spend the amount of advance investment payments availed to them through the methodology we are finalizing in this rule. We would consider modifications in future rulemaking.

Comment: We received several comments on our proposed approach to provide variable, quarterly payments, and to calculate those payments prior to the start of the upcoming quarter using the latest assignment list and latest beneficiary-level risk factors data available. Several commenters supported the proposal to provide payments to ACOs on a quarterly basis, indicating that such a cadence of payment correctly balances CMS burden and predictability of funding for ACOs. One commenter agreed with calculating quarterly payment amounts at the start of each quarter over an alternative proposal to calculate the quarterly payment amount ahead of the start of the performance year, indicating that the alternative of calculating the quarterly payment annually might result in over payment or under payment. However, another commenter suggested calculating the quarterly payment amounts prior to each quarter using the latest available data for ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, while separately calculating the quarterly payment amounts for ACOs under prospective assignment prior to the first quarter of the performance year. One commenter suggested that CMS provide more flexibility to receive funds on an annual basis rather than quarterly payments. Another commenter thought that CMS should allow ACOs to opt into CMS calculating the quarterly payments once before the start of the year, or recalculating payments quarterly. The commenter indicated that the flexibility to choose between fixed or varying payments would allow ACOs to best meet the needs of their individual organization.

Response: We continue to believe that quarterly payments provide the best balance between consistent payments for ACOs and operational burden for CMS. We do not believe that allowing ACOs to have their quarterly payments calculated once at the beginning of the year, as opposed to at the beginning of each quarter, would offer significant benefit to ACOs nor substantially reduce burden for CMS. Calculating the payments at the beginning of each quarter ensures that the latest available assignment list is used and that the quarterly, variable payments to ACOs are appropriate. Fixing the quarterly payments at the beginning of a year creates unnecessary risk that quarterly payments are too high or too low relative to an ACO's assigned beneficiary population.

Comment: With respect to information available to ACOs about the quarterly payment, one commenter expressed support for CMS' proposal to notify ACOs of quarterly payment amounts via a detailed report of the calculation. Another commenter expressed concern that the existing ADI mapping tools (available through Neighborhood Atlas®) are limited and only allow users to look up addresses one at a time. The commenter believes that licensing restrictions would prevent ACOs from partnering with other entities that could assist them in developing more sophisticated tools to allow them to identify their beneficiaries' ADI scores more readily.

Response: We agree that providing ACOs with a report detailing the calculation of quarterly, variable payments will ensure both transparency of the process and also the accuracy of such payments. As explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, with each quarterly payment we will provide each ACO with a report that shows our calculation of the quarterly payment amount, including the risk factors-based score, ADI national percentile rank, dual eligibility status, and LIS status we assigned to each beneficiary used as part of the calculation and the per beneficiary payment that corresponds to their risk factors-based score. We note that such information overlaps with the information shared regarding the health equity adjustment, which we are finalizing as part of the quality performance standard. For a discussion of our reporting of this information to ACOs please see section III.G.4.b.(7).(g) of this final rule. We believe this information will be sufficient for ACOs to identify their beneficiaries' ADI rankings and that ACOs would not need to additionally identify their beneficiaries' rankings on their own using the mapping tools or the publicly available files from the Neighborhood Atlas®.

Comment: Several commenters expressed general support of the use of a risk factors-based score in calculating the advanced payments or support for particular elements of CMS' proposed methodology for determining beneficiaries' risk factors-based scores. A couple commenters expressed their preference for the use of ADI over the alternative proposal of using health provider shortage area (HPSA) data, with one such commenter citing that the ADI better represents the health-related social needs a beneficiary may face and leverages pre-existing data which lowers burden on practices, and the other citing that living in a health provider shortage area is only one of many socioeconomic factors impacting health, and therefore, it is appropriate for CMS to use more comprehensive measures of disadvantage (such as the ADI) in the effort to incorporate health equity as a consideration in APM designs. One commenter expressed support for CMS' proposal to determine a beneficiary's dual eligibility status based on whether the beneficiary had at least one month of dual enrollment within the 12-month window corresponding with the assignment window used for preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation for that particular assignment run. The commenter also supported CMS' proposal to impute a score of 50 out of 100 for those beneficiaries for which CMS does not have sufficient data to calculate a risk factors-based score and provide the median payment amount. One commenter preferred CMS' proposal to assign a score of 100 to dually eligible beneficiaries over the alternative considered to calculate a score based on the combination of the national ADI percentile rank and an additional 25 points for dually eligible beneficiaries, indicating that the alternative was overly complicated for program participants.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' support for risk factors-based scores and for particular elements of the proposed methodology to calculate those scores.

Comment: We also received comments expressing concern with CMS' proposed methodology to calculate beneficiary risk factors-based scores. We received a couple of comments expressing concern with the proposed use of dual eligibility status in calculation of the beneficiary's risk factors-based score. MedPAC urged CMS to consider use of the Medicare Part D LIS in the risk factors-based score rather than dual eligibility, citing recent Commission work that found using the LIS designation helped to reduce the impact of variation in State Medicaid benefits on nationally standardized Medicare policies. The other commenter expressed similar concerns with using dual eligibility, stating that dual eligibility status is not a consistent measure of economic distress across States as Medicaid eligibility varies by State. The commenter encouraged CMS to evaluate the impacts of this variation and consider whether another—more uniform—measure of economic insecurity should be used to target AIP funds to ACOs.

Response: We agree with the commenters that dual eligibility status has limitations due to variability in Medicaid eligibility across different States, and we are persuaded that LIS status is a preferable and more standardized measure of low income among the Medicare FFS population. However, we note that LIS also has certain limitations. For example, all beneficiaries with dual eligibility status or who receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI) automatically receive the LIS designation in CMS data systems. Beneficiaries who do not have dual eligibility status or SSI status but whose income is lower than 150 percent of the Federal poverty level must apply for the LIS. 262 Our analysis found that the vast majority of Medicare beneficiaries with the LIS designation are those who automatically received this designation rather than those who applied for the benefit and were approved. Nonetheless, despite this limitation, we agree that the use of the LIS designation, in addition to dual eligibility status, is preferable to using dual eligibility status alone, as doing so reduces variability across States while moderately expanding the number of beneficiaries we will identify as low income and who will automatically qualify for the maximum risk factors-based score of 100. Furthermore, we note that including LIS in the calculation provides ACOs with an incentive to support eligible beneficiaries who must apply for the benefit to make the connection.

262 Memo: “2021 Resource and Cost-Sharing Limits for Low-Income Subsidy (LIS)”. October 30, 2020. Department of Health & Human Services. Accessed at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2021-lis-resource-limits-memo.pdf on September 22, 2022.

We note that, like beneficiary dual eligibility status, beneficiary LIS enrollment is a monthly indicator. Therefore, we will use similar logic as we proposed for dual eligibility status (87 FR 46105) to determine if a beneficiary has the LIS designation. We will consider the beneficiary's enrollment status in LIS for each month of a 12-month window. The 12-month window will correspond with the assignment window used for preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation for that particular assignment run. If a beneficiary had zero months of LIS enrollment, we will consider the beneficiary not enrolled in LIS. If the beneficiary had at least one month of LIS enrollment, we will consider the beneficiary enrolled in LIS.

Comment: Several commenters expressed concern with the use of the national ADI percentile ranks in the calculation of the risk factors-based score. A couple of these commenters suggested that the national ADI was inadequate for identifying underserved populations, as the high cost of living for certain areas masks some disadvantaged areas, particularly high cost urban areas. Another commenter warned that relying heavily on ADI national percentile rankings to inform equity initiatives may further disadvantage underserved populations in urban areas, given that the index is not adjusted for geographic differences in cost of living. Another commenter shared a similar sentiment, suggesting that the use of ADI as proposed, would direct funds primarily towards rural areas again. A couple commenters noted that the CMS cited study from the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule on the proposed health equity adjustment actually uses regionally calibrated ADI rankings instead of the national percentiles CMS proposed to use.

Commenters offered a variety of alternatives to the proposal to use the ADI national percentile rank in the risk factors-based score, including:

• Adjusting the ADI to reflect geographic price differences, as well as incorporating additional metrics such as life expectancy.

• Informing the risk factors-based scores with individual beneficiary-level social risk factors once adequate data sources become available.

• Replacing the ADI national percentile rank with the CDC's small area life expectancy measure.

• Replacing the ADI national percentile rank with a proprietary index that incorporates social determinants of health metrics as an alternative to the ADI.

• Exploring strategies for incorporating HPSA and other metrics into score calculations.

• Regionally adjust the ADI national percentile rank, or replace it with State-level ADI decile to more adequately capture geographic price differences.

• Use the ADI national percentile rank and a beneficiary's dual eligibility status unless an ACO is able to provide more granular individual social determinants of health data to adjust the scoring.

Some commenters who found the national ADI rankings unfavorable suggested that CMS take more time to recalibrate the methodology to calculate a risk factor-based score to more sensitively identify underserved areas.

Response: We thank commenters for their thoughtful input on this topic. After consideration and review of commenters suggestions, we believe that, at this time, the ADI national percentile rank remains the best available option for assigning a risk factors-based score to a beneficiary who does not have the LIS or dual eligibility status designation. One key strength we see with the ADI is that it is a comprehensive, publicly available dataset that applies a standardized score for all census block groups nationwide and can be updated periodically as new ACS Five Year Estimates become available. This also aligns with recent recommendations from the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE). ASPE commissioned three environmental scans of: (1) area-level indices of social risk; (2) measures used in government programs that target areas, providers, or populations with social risk; and (3) existing payment models that incorporate measures of social risk. Although ASPE concluded that none of the existing area-level indices are ideal, for immediate policy development, they concluded that the ADI or the Social Deprivation Index (SDI) were the best available choices when selecting an index for addressing Health Related Social Needs or Social Determinants of Health. 263

263 Report: “Landscape of Area-Level Deprivation Measures and Other Approaches to Account for Social Risk and Social Determinants of Health in Health Care Payments.” Accessed at https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/area-level-measures-account-sdoh on September 27, 2022.

We agree with the commenters who stated that certain census block groups in certain areas of the U.S. may have lower ADI national percentile ranks than they would using the ADI State decile ranks. We acknowledge that census block groups in areas with higher cost of living (which some commenters suggest tend to be urban areas) are more likely to have this result than areas with lower cost of living. However, our analysis finds that using State decile ranks in lieu of national percentile ranks would actually reduce the quarterly payment amount for the majority of ACOs in our simulation. Additionally, our analysis suggests that including LIS and dual eligibility status in the calculation of the risk factors-based score assists ACOs in areas where beneficiaries have a higher State ADI than a national ADI. We looked at the effect of the policy to assign 100 points for dual eligibility status among the remaining ACOs that would have had higher quarterly payments if we use State deciles. We found that when we assigned 100 points for LIS and dual eligibility status (as opposed to only using the beneficiary's ADI), the payment differences between using national versus State ADI shrunk for nearly all of those ACOs. We believe that switching to a State ADI decile would dilute the effectiveness of this option to attract ACOs to form or expand into more underserved areas of the country.

We remind commenters that beneficiaries determined to be low income using LIS status or dual eligibility status will automatically receive the maximum risk factors-based score of 100 and will qualify for the maximum per beneficiary payment. Additionally, beneficiaries whose risk factors-based score instead reflects the ADI national percentile rank of the area in which they reside will still receive a per beneficiary payment amount (if the beneficiary has a score of at least 25 and is among the ACO's 10,000 assigned beneficiaries with the highest risk factors-based score). We designed the per beneficiary payment amounts to moderately decrease as a beneficiary's risk factors-based score decreases, but any beneficiary who has a risk factors-based score of 25 or higher will be included in the calculation of the ACO's quarterly payment if the beneficiary is among the ACO's 10,000 beneficiaries with the highest risk factors-based score.

We reiterate that we appreciate commenters' thoughtful input on this matter; we intend to continue exploring how we might incorporate such factors in a fair, standardized, comprehensive, and transparent manner into our future policy. We believe that the determination of a beneficiary risk factors-based score should be transparent, and that the underlying metrics should use recent data in a similar manner as the ADI.

Comment: We also received a few comments related to the proposed methodology to calculate the quarterly payment amount based on the beneficiaries with the highest risk factors-based scores for up to 10,000 beneficiaries, or an alternative to calculate an average risk factors-based score based on all the assigned beneficiaries in the ACO. A few commenters noted that the proposal to consider the 10,000 beneficiaries with the highest risk factors-based score was preferable to using an average score for all assigned beneficiaries, citing that the latter might mask variation, dilute the scores, or result in an improper distribution of funds. MedPAC supported the alternative to use an average risk factors-based score for the entire ACO's assigned population, indicating that this would encourage large ACOs to continue to include beneficiaries with high risk factors-based scores beyond the first 10,000 and inducing a greater inclusion of underserved beneficiaries.

Response: We continue to believe that the proposed policy, which determines quarterly, variable payments solely based on the 10,000 beneficiaries with the highest risk factors-based score, is the most generous to participating ACOs and will best meet their needs when establishing operations and care in underserved areas. Calculating the quarterly payments based on the average risk factors-based score across an ACO's entire assigned beneficiary population would lead to lower quarterly payments for ACOs with more than 10,000 assigned beneficiaries and thereby reduce the ability of many participating ACOs to expand care to underserved populations. Based on the profile of the low revenue ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program in recent years, we expect that a large proportion of new, low revenue ACOs have more than 10,000 assigned beneficiaries, and would thus receive lower quarterly payments if we were to adopt the alternative to calculate it using the ACO's average risk factors-based score. We prefer an approach to determine a payment based on the 10,000 beneficiaries in the ACO with the highest risk factors-based scores, as those are the beneficiaries for whom we expect could benefit the most from the upfront investments made by the ACO.

After consideration of the public comments and for the reasons stated above and in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46103), we are finalizing the advance investment payment methodology at § 425.630(f) with a modification to incorporate the low-income subsidy designation in the calculation of the risk factors-based score at § 425.630(f)(ii). That is, the risk factors-based score will be set to 100 if the beneficiary is enrolled in the Medicare Part D LIS or is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. The risk factors-based score will be set to the ADI national percentile rank matched to the beneficiary's mailing address if the beneficiary is not enrolled in the Medicare Part D LIS or is not dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid and sufficient data is available to match the beneficiary to an ADI national percentile rank. The risk factors-based score will be set to 50 if the beneficiary is not enrolled in the Medicare Part D LIS or is not dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid and sufficient data is not available to match the beneficiary to an Area Deprivation Index national percentile rank. We are finalizing our proposal as proposed to use the ADI national percentile rank, without additional modifications to that rank, to inform the beneficiary's risk factors-based score.

(6) Duration of Advance Investment Payment

In AIM, ACOs in the model participated in 3-year agreements in the Shared Savings Program, and they received prepaid shared savings for the first 2 years of their participation and were allowed to spend that funding over their entire 3-year agreement period. In AIM, we observed that many ACO model participants needed the entire agreement period to be able to spend the prepaid shared savings they received under the model. Based on our experience with AIM, we proposed at § 425.630(f)(1) that the ACOs would receive AIPs (a one-time payment of $250,000 plus quarterly payments calculated in accordance with § 425.630(f)(2)) in the first 2 years of their participation agreement. We proposed at § 425.630(e)(3) that an ACO would be permitted to spend the AIPs over its entire 5-year agreement period and must repay to CMS any unspent funds at the end of its agreement period. We stated that CMS would issue a demand letter for any such amounts. We stated that the requirement that funds be spent during the agreement period furthers our goals of supporting the establishment of ACOs and delivering care to beneficiaries in a prompt manner. We sought public comments on our proposal to provide AIPs to ACOs for the first 2 years of the ACO's performance period, to allow ACOs to spend those payments over the duration of their 5-year agreement period, and to send a demand letter for any unspent funds at the end of the ACO's agreement period.

Comment: We received a couple comments on the duration of advance investment payments. One commenter agreed with the duration as proposed that an ACO receive quarterly payments for 2 years and that the ACO be permitted to spend the AIPs over their entire 5-year agreement period. The commenter stated it provides ample time for ACOs to use the funds and invest in sustainable initiatives while ensuring the funds are used promptly and appropriately to impact beneficiaries' care. Another commenter suggested that CMS provide quarterly payments for the full duration of a 5-year agreement period for new, low revenue ACOs, citing that the extended payments would help these ACOs acclimate to the program.

Response: We agree with the first commenter, that an ACO be permitted to spend the AIPs over their entire 5-year agreement period. We expect this to enable ACOs to make appropriate investments into quality care for underserved beneficiaries in a thoughtful manner and strategize how best to accomplish Shared Savings Program goals. We do not agree with the suggestion to extend the quarterly payments for the full 5-year agreement period. We have concerns that extending the quarterly payments would burden ACOs with larger repayment amounts. In the case of ACOs that do not achieve sufficient shared savings to repay the AIP amounts, extending the quarterly payments would increase costs to the program. We believe providing 2 years of quarterly payments appropriately balances providing sufficient start-up capital for an ACO with providing the ACO time to implement their care coordination efforts to earn shared savings in later years.

For the reasons discussed above, we are finalizing the policies as proposed. Specifically, we are finalizing § 425.630(e)(3), which permits ACOs to spend AIPs over their entire agreement period, and § 425.630(f)(1), which establishes a single upfront fixed payment and quarterly, variable payments for the first 2 years of an ACO's agreement period.

(7) Compliance and Monitoring

(a) Public Reporting and Monitoring of Spend Plan

We proposed to monitor the spending of AIPs to provide CMS with a clear indication of how ACOs intend to spend AIPs, provide adequate protection to the Medicare Trust Funds, and to prevent funds from being misdirected or appropriated for activities that do not constitute a permitted use of the funds. We explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule that we would do so by comparing the anticipated spending as set forth in the spend plan submitted with an ACO's application against the actual spending as reported on the ACO's public reporting web page, including any expenditures not identified in the spend plan. We proposed that the reported annual spending must include any expenditures of AIPs on items not identified in the spend plan. ACOs would be required to annually report their actual expenditures via an updated spend plan on their public reporting web page.

We noted that we believe that transparency of information in the health care sector facilitates more informed patient choice and offers incentives and feedback that help improve the quality and lower the cost of care and improve oversight with respect to program integrity. As we discussed in previous final rules, improved transparency supports a number of program requirements. In particular, increased transparency is consistent with and supports the requirement under section 1899(b)(2)(A) of the Act for an ACO to be willing to “become accountable for the quality, cost, and overall care” of the Medicare beneficiaries assigned to it.

Therefore, as discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we believe it is desirable and consistent with section 1899(b)(2)(A) of the Act for several aspects of an ACO's use of AIPs to be available to the public. Making this information available will provide both Medicare beneficiaries and the general public with insight into the use of AIP funds by an ACO. Accordingly, we proposed to modify § 425.308 to require that an ACO annually report on its public reporting web page information regarding AIPs. Specifically, we proposed at § 425.308(b)(8) that, for each performance year, an ACO would be required to report (in a standardized format specified by CMS) its spend plan, the total amount of AIPs received, and an itemization of how any AIPs were actually spent during the year, including expenditure categories, the dollar amounts spent on the various categories, any changes to the spend plan as submitted under § 425.630(d)(1), and such other information as may be specified by CMS. We proposed that this itemization would include expenditures not identified or anticipated in the ACO's submitted spend plan, and any amounts remaining unspent. As proposed, if CMS determined that an ACO had disbursed AIPs for a prohibited use under proposed § 425.630(e)(2), CMS could terminate the ACO's receipt of AIPs under proposed § 425.630(h), as discussed later in this section. Any AIPs that are unspent at the end of the ACO's agreement period must be repaid to CMS under proposed § 425.630(e)(3), as discussed above in section III.G.2.a.(6) of this final rule. Additionally, CMS could take compliance action as specified in §§ 425.216 and 425.218 if an ACO spent the funds on a prohibited use or had unspent funds at the end of the agreement period. We sought comment on all aspects of the proposal.

We noted that under existing § 425.314, ACOs would be required to retain adequate books and records to ensure that CMS has the information necessary to conduct appropriate monitoring and oversight of ACOs' use of AIPs (for example, invoices, receipts, and other supporting documentation of AIP disbursements). To protect the program and the Medicare Trust Funds, we explained that we may use our authority under §§ 425.314 and 425.316 to audit ACO compliance with Shared Savings Program requirements and to monitor the performance of ACOs, respectively. We noted that we would conduct audits as necessary to monitor and assess an ACO's use of AIPs and compliance with other requirements related to such payments.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the policies we proposed regarding public reporting and monitoring of spend plans and our responses:

Comment: One commenter supported the proposals concerning public reporting and monitoring of ACO spend plans. A few commenters supported leveraging the public reporting web page to include ACO spend plans. Several commenters requested that CMS provide guidance on reporting requirements to minimize ACO administrative burden. The commenters suggested seeking feedback from ACOs when developing standardized reporting formats.

Response: We appreciate the support of the commenters. CMS will provide guidance for reporting AIP spend plan and usage of AIP funds on the ACO's public reporting web page, and we intend to develop guidance that will minimize administrative burden in the reporting of this information. To ensure program transparency and public accountability, CMS will require an ACO to publicly report its spend plan in a standardized format before and after the performance year. Before each performance year, the ACO must publicly report the anticipated spend plan, including planned expenditure categories and percentages within each category. After each performance year, the ACO must publicly report the total amount of AIPs received and an itemization of the AIPs spent during the year (that is, expenditure categories and the amounts spent on the various categories), and any changes to the spend plan. CMS will also post information on the ACOs' AIP payments, spend plans, and actual expenditures on its Shared Savings Program data page. CMS's monitoring of this information will assist CMS in protecting the Medicare Trust Funds from being misdirected or misappropriated for activities that do not constitute a permitted use of AIP funds.

We are finalizing our public reporting policy as proposed. Specifically, we are finalizing new § 425.308(b)(8), which sets forth the reporting requirements for AIPs.

(b) Monitoring for Changes in ACO Experience With Risk and ACO Revenue

As described in section III.G.2.a.(2) of this final rule, under the new § 425.630(b), ACOs must meet the following basic criteria to be eligible for AIPs:

• The ACO is not a renewing or re-entering ACO, as defined under § 425.20.

• The ACO is applying to participate under any level of the BASIC track glide path as specified under § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A).

• The ACO must be inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, as defined by § 425.20.

• The ACO must be a low revenue ACO, as defined by § 425.20.

Based on our program experience, the inexperienced/experienced and low/high revenue ACO determination could be affected by changes in the ACO participant list that are made during the course of the agreement period, where the changes are not motivated by the ACO's desire to avoid program requirements regarding participation options. ACO participant list changes during the agreement period could affect the categorization of ACOs, particularly for ACOs close to the threshold percentage. As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we considered that an ACO may change its composition of ACO participants each performance year. Any approach under which we would apply different policies to ACOs based on a determination of ACO participant prior experience under performance-based risk would need to recognize the potential for an ACO to add or remove ACO participants which could affect whether an ACO meets the definition of experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. We noted our concerns about the possibility that an ACO may be eligible to receive AIPs and then quickly thereafter seek to add ACO participants experienced with performance-based risk, thereby avoiding the inexperience and low revenue eligibility requirements.

To identify and address these circumstances, we proposed at § 425.316(e)(1) that CMS will monitor ACOs that receive AIPs to determine if they remain low revenue ACOs that are inexperienced with performance-based risk. We noted that we would monitor ACOs for changes in the risk experience of ACO participants that would cause an ACO to be considered experienced with performance-based risk or a high revenue ACO, and therefore, ineligible for AIPs.

We proposed at § 425.316(e)(2) to specify that if an ACO receiving AIPs becomes experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or becomes a high revenue ACO during any performance year of the agreement period, CMS would cease paying the ACO AIPs starting the quarter after the ACO became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or became a high revenue ACO and may take compliance action as specified in §§ 425.216 and 425.218.

As proposed, § 425.316(e)(3) would require that the ACO repay spent and unspent AIPs if CMS takes pre-termination action under § 425.216 and the ACO continues to be experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or a high revenue ACO after a deadline specified by CMS pursuant to such compliance action (for example, the next deadline for updating the ACO participant list). We proposed that to retain its AIP, an ACO that CMS determines to be experienced with performance-based risk or a high revenue ACO would be required to remedy the issue by the deadline specified by CMS. For example, if the ACO participants' total Medicare Parts A and B FFS revenue has increased in relation to total Medicare Parts A and B FFS expenditures for the ACO's assigned beneficiaries, the ACO could remove an ACO participant from its ACO participant list so that the ACO could meet the definition of a low revenue ACO. If the ACO fails to respond to compliance action under § 425.216 or otherwise fails to remedy the eligibility issue by the applicable deadline, the ACO would be required to repay all AIPs it had received. We proposed that CMS would provide written notification to the ACO of the amount due, and the ACO must pay such amount no later than 90 days after the receipt of notification. We noted that CMS may recover the amount owed by reducing the amount of any shared savings.

To aid us in determining whether it would be appropriate for us to recoup AIP funds from an ACO, we further proposed to update the definitions of “inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” and “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” under § 425.20 to allow for a rolling lookback period of the 5 most recent performance years beginning from the current performance year being monitored. This would be applicable to both ongoing compliance determinations and the assessment of an ACO's application to participate under a participation option for an agreement period under proposed § 425.600(h). We noted that we would provide ACOs with preliminary participation options reports throughout the application and ACO participant list change request cycles so ACOs can be fully informed of the impact of becoming experienced with performance-based risk or high revenue for the upcoming performance year.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on these proposals and our responses:

Comment: One commenter encouraged CMS to take a more nuanced approach when taking remedial action should an ACO become designated as high revenue ACO or an ACO experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. The commenter suggested that CMS consider the ACO's specific circumstances. For example, if an ACO adds a CAH to its ACO participant list and subsequently becomes high revenue, the commenter suggested that CMS could cease future payments of AIPs but not require payback of disbursed funds to avoid penalizing the ACO for adding a safety net provider. The commenter also suggested that CMS review the spending of AIPs when determining repayment. For instance, if the spent funds were invested in patient care or infrastructure that results in an ongoing benefit for Medicare providers, suppliers, and/or beneficiaries, the commenter suggested CMS only require repayment of the unspent AIP funds.

Response: We disagree with the commenter. As outlined in the 2018 final rule, Pathways to Success, we believe that the total Medicare Parts A and B FFS revenue of the ACO participants could be indicative of whether the ACO participants, and therefore, potentially the ACO, are more or less capitalized. We intend to limit AIP to ACOs that would not otherwise have access to funding, as some proportion of ACOs are unlikely to earn enough shared savings to repay AIP, and distributing AIP funding to ACOs that are sufficiently capitalized poses an unnecessary risk to the Trust Funds. However, we would continue to evaluate and employ a range of methods to monitor and assess the effectiveness of the eligibility requirements as AIP is implemented.

We are finalizing the provisions we proposed at § 425.316(e) regarding monitoring of ACO eligibility for AIPs, with additional language confirming that CMS may review eligibility during any performance year. This language is consistent with the preamble, but was inadvertently omitted from the regulation text.

(c) Termination of Advance Investment Payments

Under §§ 425.216 and 425.218, CMS can terminate an ACO or take pre-termination actions (such as requesting a corrective action plan) if CMS determines that an ACO is not in compliance with eligibility or other Shared Savings Program requirements. Accordingly, in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we discussed that if we finalize our proposal to implement AIPs, CMS could take remedial action under those provisions if an ACO receiving such payments becomes experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, becomes a high revenue ACO, spends AIPs for a prohibited use, fails to comply with other AIP requirements, or meets any of the grounds for ACO termination set forth in § 425.218(b). We noted that where appropriate, we would work with the ACO to understand why the noncompliance with AIP requirements had occurred so that we could develop an effective plan of action and monitoring technique. We also noted that our existing pre-termination actions do not include the cessation of payments to an ACO. To protect the Trust Funds, encourage speedy resolution of noncompliance, and provide an added safeguard against abuse, we proposed at § 425.630(h)(1) and (2) that CMS may terminate an ACO's receipt of AIPs if the ACO ceases to meet the eligibility requirements specified in proposed § 425.630(b)(3) and (4), fails to comply with other AIP requirements, or meets any of the grounds for termination set forth at § 425.218(b). For the same reasons, we further proposed under § 425.630(h)(3) that CMS may immediately terminate an ACO's AIPs without taking any of the pre-termination actions set forth in § 425.216. We noted that we expect that immediate termination of AIPs would be invoked only in cases of serious noncompliance or when the ACO's actions or inaction poses a risk of harm to beneficiaries or negatively affects access to care.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on this proposal and our responses:

Comment: One commenter supported the proposal because it ensures program integrity and appropriate protections for beneficiaries.

Response: We agree with the commenter. We note that we intend to work with an ACO to understand why it is not compliant with AIP requirements and to develop an effective plan of action and monitoring technique to ensure future compliance.

For the reasons discussed above, we are finalizing without change the policies we proposed at § 425.630(h). Specifically, under § 425.630(h)(1), CMS may terminate advance investment payments if the ACO fails to comply with the requirements of § 425.630, or meets the grounds for termination under § 425.218(b). Under § 425.630(h)(2), CMS will terminate an ACO's AIPs in accordance with § 425.316(e) if the no longer meets the AIP eligibility requirements set forth at § 425.630(b)(3) and (b)(4). Under § 425.630(h)(3), CMS may immediately terminate distribution of an ACO's advanced investment payments without taking any pre-termination actions under § 425.216.

(8) Recoupment

In AIM, we recouped prepaid shared savings from any shared savings earned by an ACO in its current agreement period, and if necessary, future agreement periods. If the ACO did not achieve shared savings, then the prepaid shared savings were not recouped. Additionally, the balance of funding was not recouped if the ACO completed the agreement period and decided not to reenroll in a second agreement period. If the ACO terminated prior to the end of its 3-year agreement period, the remaining balance was required to be repaid in full. During the model, we observed that offering new small ACOs prepaid shared savings that they were not at risk of being forced to repay if they did not achieve savings was a critical incentive for small providers and suppliers to form ACOs to join AIM and the Shared Savings Program. Based on our experience in AIM, we proposed at § 425.630(g) a policy for recoupment of AIPs from an ACO. The Shared Savings Program now has 5-year agreement periods instead of the 3-year agreement periods that were in effect during AIM, so some timing adjustments to the recoupment policy are necessary, but the majority of the proposed policy aligned with AIM recoupment policy.

We proposed at § 425.630(g)(1) to recoup AIPs from any shared savings, as defined in § 425.20, earned by the ACO in any performance year until CMS has recouped all AIPs. We further proposed that if there are insufficient shared savings to recoup the AIPs made to an ACO for a performance year. We further proposed that for both renewing and re-entering ACOs, we would carry forward any remaining balance owed to subsequent performance year(s) in which the ACO achieves shared savings, including any performance year(s) in a subsequent agreement period.

At § 425.630(g)(2), we proposed that in circumstances where the amount of shared savings earned by the ACO is revised upward by CMS for any reason, we would reduce the redetermined amount of shared savings by the amount of AIPs made to the ACO as of the date of the redetermination. If the amount of shared savings earned by the ACO is revised downward by CMS for any reason, we proposed that the ACO would not receive a refund of any portion of the AIPs previously recouped or otherwise repaid.

We proposed under § 425.630(g)(3) that for each performance year, we would not recoup an amount of AIPs greater than the shared savings earned by an ACO for that performance year (except as provided in § 425.630(g)(4) and § 425.316(e)(3)). Thus, if an ACO does not earn shared savings in its agreement period or a subsequent agreement period, we would not recoup any of the AIPs from the ACO.

For example, if an ACO received $300,000 in AIPs and achieved shared savings of $500,000 for the first performance year, we would recoup $300,000 and pay $200,000 in shared savings to the ACO. Alternatively, if an ACO received $300,000 in AIPs and achieved shared savings of $200,000 for the first performance year, we would recoup only $200,000 and not pay any shared savings to the ACO. The outstanding balance of $100,000 would be carried forward, to be recouped in a future performance year in which the ACO achieves shared savings. Under a third scenario, if the ACO does not achieve shared savings in all 5 performance years of its agreement period and does not renew for another agreement period in the Shared Savings Program, we would not recoup any AIPs made to the ACO. However, to protect the program from abuse, CMS would recoup any outstanding balance from a re-entering ACO determined to be experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. We noted that a “re-entering ACO,” as defined at § 425.20, includes an ACO that is a new legal entity that is applying to participate in the program and more than 50 percent of its ACO participants were included on the ACO participant list of the same ACO in any of the 5 most recent performance years.

At § 425.630(g)(4), we proposed that if an ACO terminates its participation agreement during the agreement period in which it received an AIP, the ACO must repay all AIPs it received. In such a case, CMS would provide written notification to the ACO of the amount due and the ACO must pay such amount no later than 90 days after the receipt of notification. As explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we noted that this proposal would ensure that AIPs are used by ACOs that complete their agreement period and reduces the risk of ACOs using termination to avoid repayment of the AIPs.

As described in section III.G.2.a.(2) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we proposed that an ACO would not be eligible for AIPs unless it is a low revenue ACO, as defined at § 425.20, and inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, as defined at § 425.20. A goal of the AIPs is to encourage the formation of ACOs, and based on our experience with AIM, we recognize that new, smaller ACOs need start-up funding to join the Shared Savings Program and to continue care coordination over the agreement period.

As described in section III.G.2.a.(7)(b) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we proposed to monitor and notify ACOs if they become high revenue or experienced with performance-based risk during a performance year so they may choose to modify their ACO participant lists for the next performance year to maintain their low revenue and inexperienced status. As proposed at § 425.316(e), if CMS determines that an ACO is experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or is a high revenue ACO, CMS will cease payment of AIPs starting the quarter after the ACO became experienced with performance-based risk or became a high revenue ACO, and CMS may take compliance action as specified in §§ 425.216 and 425.218. For example, if CMS determines that an ACO became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or became a high revenue ACO during the annual change request and assignment process for the second performance year of the agreement period, CMS would not pay to the ACO additional AIPs, effective the next quarterly payment after the ACO became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or a high revenue ACO, which would be January 1 of the second performance year. In addition, CMS could take compliance action as specified in §§ 425.216 and 425.218. If CMS determines after all AIPs have been paid (for example, during the third performance year of the agreement period) that an ACO became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, CMS may take compliance action as specified in § 425.216 and account for any inappropriate payments. For example, CMS could issue a request for a corrective action plan, and the ACO would be required to come back into compliance the following performance year. If an ACO remains noncompliant after the compliance deadline specified by CMS, we would provide written notification to the ACO of the amount due and the ACO must pay such amount no later than 90 days after the receipt of such notification. To achieve the goal of AIPs and ensure that the payments support new, smaller ACOs, we proposed at § 425.316(e) that if CMS determines during the agreement period in which an ACO received an AIP that the ACO became a high revenue ACO or became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, the ACO may be required to repay all AIPs it received during the agreement period. We proposed to provide written notification to the ACO of the amount due and to require the ACO to pay such amount no later than 90 days after the receipt of notification.

We proposed at § 425.630(g)(5) that if an ACO that received AIPs enters into proceedings relating to bankruptcy, whether voluntary or involuntary, the ACO must provide written notice of the bankruptcy to CMS and to the U.S. Attorney's Office in the district where the bankruptcy was filed, unless final payment for the agreement period has been made by either CMS or the administrative or judicial review proceedings relating to any payments under the Shared Savings Program have been fully and finally resolved. We proposed that the notice of bankruptcy must be sent by certified mail no later than 5 days after the petition has been filed and must contain a copy of the filed bankruptcy petition (including its docket number). We proposed that the notice to CMS must be addressed to the CMS Office of Financial Management at 7500 Security Boulevard, Mailstop C3-01-24, Baltimore, MD 21244 or such other address as may be specified on the CMS website for purposes of receiving such notices. We noted that our proposal was consistent with the AIM model participation agreement and ensures that CMS can recover AIPs if an ACO files for bankruptcy.

We are sought comment on all aspects of our proposals for recoupment of the AIPs made to ACOs.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on these proposals and our responses:

Comment: In general, commenters advocated for a longer recoupment period, which they believe would encourage ACO long-term participation and reinvestment of funds into ACO operations and improvements. Several commenters suggested that CMS should allow ACOs to retain some percentage of their shared savings payments during each recoupment period. Some of these commenters suggested that CMS should recoup AIPs by collecting only up to 50 percent of earned shared savings per performance year during the agreement period and in any subsequent agreement period. A few of these commenters noted that they believe longer recoupment periods would provide continuity and sustained funding for these ACOs, making them more likely to continue participation in the program and to progress to more advanced levels of risk. One commenter opined that it typically takes low revenue ACOs 2 to 3 years to achieve savings, suggesting that immediate recoupment of AIPs would disadvantage new entrant ACOs or those serving lower income or underserved populations. To increase program participation and reduce barriers to entry, a few commenters suggested CMS reduce AIP recoupment proportionally to the number of underserved beneficiaries served by the ACO. The commenters requested that CMS monitor the individual circumstances surrounding an ACO's early termination and consider unintended negative consequences it may have on the ACO's beneficiaries.

Response: We disagree with the commenters. Regarding the comment that ACOs should be permitted to repay AIPs over a longer period of time, we note that the recoupment period begins in the first performance year of the agreement period in which the ACO receives AIPs and can continue for the remainder of that agreement period and into one or more agreement periods. We believe that this policy safeguards the Medicare Trust Funds by recouping AIPs expeditiously. We do not believe that immediately recouping these funds from earned shared savings will disadvantage any ACOs as they will be receiving quarterly payments for the first 2 years. Regarding the commenters who advocated that ACOs should be able to retain a portion of their AIPs or be liable for a reduced repayment amount, we note that the AIPs are not intended to supplement FFS payments, but rather provide start-up capital out of future shared savings to be used by new ACOs to provide sufficient resources for staffing, providing accountable care for underserved beneficiaries, and investing in healthcare delivery infrastructure.

Comment: One commenter advocated that CMS forgive the repayment requirement should an ACO complete its initial agreement period without achieving shared savings. Another commenter encouraged CMS not to recoup any remaining AIP balance owed even if an ACO terminates during the same agreement period in which it received AIP. One commenter speculated that recoupment could discourage participation because it would be difficult for an ACO to transition smoothly out of the Shared Savings Program if AIPs must be repaid upon early termination and if recoupment continues into the next agreement period. One commenter suggested recoupment of AIP funds be limited to unspent funds at the time of termination because early termination may be the result of an ACO's inability to secure operating funds or the loss of ACO participants through competition from other ACOs. A few commenters stated that, in determining the amount of AIPs to be repaid, CMS should consider an ACO's circumstances and timing of termination, as well as investments made with the funds before recoupment. The commenter recommended that CMS revise the proposed recoupment policies to take a more equitable approach.

To encourage and support ACOs that provide care for underserved beneficiaries, one commenter suggested that CMS forgo AIP recoupment for ACOs that exceed quality and savings goals over the participation agreement period. Another commenter proposed eliminating the requirement to recoup AIPs if safety net provider-led ACOs achieve shared savings, invest in population health infrastructure and programs and select higher levels of risk. One commenter advocated that CMS should never recoup any AIPs paid to rural ACOs and that, in the alternative, AIPs should be considered an interest-free loan. By tying recoupment policies to equity goals, CMS could incentivize the expansion of ACOs into underserved communities.

MedPAC expressed concern that significant, forgivable upfront payments coupled with ACOs exiting the program would preclude program savings. MedPAC asserted that if program exit were high and significant upfront payments are not recouped, several types of corrective action would be needed. This could involve lowering upfront payments or requiring repayment upon exit of the program. Based on findings from prior advance payment models, MedPAC stated that stringent requirements may be needed in the future to deter ACOs from receiving advance investment payments and exiting the Shared Savings Program before they are paid back.

Response: We disagree with the commenters' assertions that AIP should not be recouped or that it should be recouped to a lesser degree under various circumstances. We view recoupment of AIPs as a critical measure necessary to ensure the adequate protection of the Medicare Trust Funds regardless of the characteristics of the ACO's provider composition, aligned beneficiary population, and financial or quality performance. In addition, by requiring immediate repayment of AIPs upon early termination, we reduce the risk that ACOs will voluntarily terminate their participation agreements to avoid repayment of the AIPs. We note that AIPs are interest free; CMS will not charge interest in when collecting AIPs via recoupment from shared savings. However, if an ACO terminates its agreement period early and fails to pay its AIP balance in full by the applicable due date, CMS will charge interest on the remaining unpaid AIP balance. We thank MedPAC for its concern for program oversight risks, and we will monitor the amount of AIPs that are not required to be repaid under the term of the program. We may consider addressing the issue in future rulemaking.

For the reasons discussed above, we are finalizing without change at § 425.630(g) our proposed policies regarding recoupment and recovery of AIPs and bankruptcy notices. Specifically, we are finalizing § 425.630(g)(1) which permits CMS to recoup AIPs made to an ACO from any shared savings it earns. Under § 425.630(g)(2), if the amount of shared savings earned by the ACO is revised upward by CMS for any reason, CMS would reduce the redetermined amount of shared savings by the amount of AIPs made to the ACO and if the amount of shared savings earned by the ACO is revised downward by CMS for any reason, the ACO will not receive a refund of any portion of the AIPs previously recouped or otherwise repaid. Under § 425.630(g)(3), CMS will not recover an amount of AIPs greater than the shared savings earned by an ACO in a given performance year (except as provided in § 425.630(g)(4) and § 425.316(e)(3)). Under § 425.630(g)(4), if an ACO terminates its participation agreement during the agreement period in which it received an AIP, the ACO must repay all AIPs received. In § 425.630(g)(5), an ACO that declares bankruptcy must notify CMS and the U.S. Attorney's Office in the district where the bankruptcy was filed, unless all AIPs have been repaid.

b. Smoothing the Transition to Performance-Based Risk

(1) Background

Since its inception in 2012, the Shared Savings Program has included both one-sided financial models (shared savings only) and two-sided financial models (shared savings and shared losses) for ACOs to select based on the arrangement that makes the most sense for their organization. Over the years, we have modified available financial models (participation options) providing “on-ramps” to attract both providers and suppliers that are new to value-based purchasing, as well as more experienced entities that are ready to accept two-sided risk. We have modified these participation options to adjust the maximum level of risk that must be assumed under two-sided models and to smooth the transition to two-sided models, including modifying eligibility criteria and adding flexibility for more advanced ACOs to transition to risk-based arrangements more quickly. These participation option modifications have been informed by lessons learned from CMS' experience with the program, testing through other initiatives conducted by the CMS Innovation Center under section 1115A of the Act (the Pioneer ACO Model, the Next Generation ACO Model and the Medicare ACO Track 1+ Model), and feedback from interested parties.

In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67904), we stated our belief that a one-sided model would have the potential to attract a large number of participants to the program and broadly introduce value-based purchasing to providers and suppliers, many of whom may not have participated in a value-based purchasing initiative before. Another reason we included the option for a one-sided track with no downside risk was that this model would be accessible to and likely to attract small, rural, safety net, and physician-only ACOs. However, we also noted that while a one-sided model could provide incentives for participants to improve quality, it might not be sufficient incentive for participants to improve the efficiency and cost of healthcare delivery (76 FR 67904). Thus, in the November 2011 final rule, we created two tracks in which ACOs could choose to participate. The one-sided model (Track 1) incorporated the statutory payment methodology under section 1899(d) of the Act, and the two-sided model (Track 2) was also based on the payment methodology under section 1899(d) of the Act but incorporated performance-based risk using the authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to use other payment models. Track 1 was available for an ACO's initial agreement period, and all ACOs were required to transition to Track 2 to continue participating in subsequent agreement periods. (76 FR 67904 through 670909).

In the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32759), we reiterated our intent to continue to encourage ACOs' forward movement up the ramp from the one-sided model to performance-based risk. The June 2015 final rule discussed policy changes that would allow ACOs not yet ready to transition to performance-based risk a second agreement period under the one-sided model, while also encouraging ACOs to enter performance-based risk models by lowering the risk under the existing Track 2 and offering an additional two-sided model (Track 3) that was based on the payment methodology under Track 2 but incorporated different elements intended to make it more attractive for entities to accept increased performance-based risk. (80 FR 32759 through 32780).

In 2017, the Innovation Center designed an additional option for eligible Track 1 ACOs, referred to as the Track 1+ ACO Model, to facilitate ACOs' transition to performance-based risk. The Track 1+ ACO Model was a time-limited model that began on January 1, 2018; it was based on Shared Savings Program Track 1 but tested a payment design that incorporated more limited downside risk, as compared to Track 2 and Track 3. Our early experience with the design of the Track 1+ ACO Model demonstrated that the availability of a lower-risk, two-sided model is an effective way to encourage ACOs in one-sided models (including ACOs within a current agreement period, initial program entrants (that is, new ACO legal entities), and renewing ACOs to progress more rapidly to performance-based risk.

Most recently, in the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 67822), CMS redesigned the participation options available under the program to encourage ACOs to transition more rapidly to two-sided models under two tracks, a BASIC track and an ENHANCED track. Both tracks are designed for 5-year agreement periods. The BASIC track includes a glide path with 5 Levels (A through E) that allows eligible ACOs to begin under a one-sided model for 2 years (each year of which is identified as a separate level (Levels A and B)) and advance to a two-sided model that includes incrementally higher levels of risk and reward (Levels C, D, and E) for the remaining 3 years of the agreement period. 264 We allowed additional flexibility for new ACO legal entities that qualify as low revenue ACOs inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives to participate for up to 3 performance years under a one-sided model (4 performance years in the case of ACOs entering an agreement period beginning on July 1, 2019) of the BASIC track's glide path before transitioning to the highest level of risk and potential reward under the BASIC track (Level E) for the final 2 years of the agreement period.

264 For more information on shared savings and shared losses for each level, see Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Shared Savings Program Participation Options for Performance Year 2022, version 4, April 2021, available at https://web.archive.org/web/20220401033547/ and https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/sharedsavingsprogram/Downloads/ssp-aco-participation-options.pdf .

Based on a combination of factors, CMS determines an ACO's eligibility for participation options in the BASIC track and ENHANCED track along with the number of agreement periods that the ACO may participate in the BASIC track. These factors include the degree to which the ACO's ACO participants control total Medicare Parts A and B FFS expenditures for the ACO's assigned beneficiaries (low revenue ACOs versus high revenue ACOs), and the ACO's experience and its ACO participants' experience with the Shared Savings Program and other performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. As noted in the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 67826), these policies were designed to increase savings for the Medicare Trust Funds and mitigate losses, reduce gaming opportunities, and promote regulatory flexibility and free-market principles.

An ACO's ability to participate in the BASIC track is limited, and all ACOs eventually must transition to participation in the ENHANCED track to continue in the program. High revenue ACOs are limited to, at most, a single agreement period under the BASIC track prior to transitioning to participation under the ENHANCED track. Low revenue ACOs are limited to, at most, 2 agreement periods for a total of 10 performance years under the BASIC track (or 11 performance years in the case of an ACO that participates in an agreement period that began on July 1, 2019, and spans a total of 6 performance years). These agreement periods do not need to be sequential. The regulations at § 425.600(e) also require that should a low revenue ACO, identified as experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, have changes in the revenue of its ACO participants that would cause the ACO to be considered a high revenue ACO (as these terms are defined in § 425.20) for a given performance year, the ACO must take corrective action or terminate its participation under the BASIC track by the end of the current performance year (83 FR 67877 and 67878).

As discussed in the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 67881), many commenters who addressed the proposed changes to the participation options disagreed with the more aggressive transition of ACOs to performance-based risk under the proposed program redesign. Some commenters cautioned that although the proposed requirement that all ACOs undertake two-sided risk at some point during their first agreement period might improve the performance of the ACOs that continue to participate in the Shared Savings Program, it might also reduce ACO participation in the program. Several commenters expressed concern that the change in program requirements might cause ACOs to end their participation in the Shared Savings Program and create a barrier to entry for ACOs to join the program. One commenter recommended that CMS carefully monitor Shared Savings Program participation and change course if participation falls precipitously. As discussed in the Regulatory Impact Analysis section below, AIM participants—a subset of Track 1 ACOs that meaningfully outperformed peer ACOs in reducing spending and earning shared savings over the period from 2016 through 2018—dropped out at an elevated frequency before even attempting to enter the one-sided model (upside-only) portion of the BASIC track glide path, where spending reductions were found to be similar regardless of an AIM ACO's decision to continue or exit the program. 265 This suggests both that, while an upside-only participation option with a lower shared savings rate can be a highly effective incentive for smaller, low revenue ACOs targeted by AIM, such ACOs also likely experience a correspondingly-magnified disincentive to accept exposure to even the limited downside risk presented by the current BASIC track glide path, and not even superior performance under Track 1 appears to provide enough confidence for such ACOs to consistently move into participation options leading to assumption of two-sided risk.

265 Trombley, MJ, et al. ACO Investment Model Produced Savings, But the Majority of Participants Exited when Faced with Downside Risk. Health Affairs. 2022; 138-146. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.01819, available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/epdf/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.01819 .

Several commenters expressed concern that requiring the rapid assumption of significant levels of risk by ACOs would discourage new participants and impede current ACOs' ability to make patient-centered infrastructure investments that are necessary for successful participation. Another commenter believed that reducing the amount of time permitted under the one-sided model was ill-advised and would jeopardize ACOs' continued participation. Our response to these comments included our commitment to continue to monitor program participation and consider further refinements to the program's participation options as we gained experience with implementing the redesigned program (83 FR 67835).

Most commenters on the proposed participation options that were finalized in the December 2018 final rule recommended that CMS extend the time any ACO can participate in a one-sided model to 3 performance years, as opposed to the 2 performance years proposed for ACOs eligible to participate under the BASIC track with participation agreements beginning on or after January 1, 2020 that do not qualify for a third year under the one-sided model under the exception in § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( ii ), stating that it takes longer than 2 performance years to implement meaningful changes in a healthcare delivery model and among healthcare provider and patient populations. Other commenters believed that the progression to two-sided risk that we proposed and ultimately finalized was far too aggressive and would deter participation. These commenters generally suggested allowing for 4 or 5 performance years (or a full agreement period) under a one-sided model. Some commenters suggested that rural ACOs should be allowed at least two, 5-year agreement periods under a one-sided model (83 FR 67847). At the time of the December 2018 final rule, we disagreed with suggestions to allow ACOs to remain under the one-sided model for an extended time because our experience suggested that the availability of 6 performance years of no risk under Track 1 and the ability to benefit from significant waivers available in the program could be leading to the formation of one-sided ACOs that were not making serious efforts to improve quality and reduce spending, potentially crowding out the formation of more effective ACOs.

The design of the current Shared Savings Program participation options, including a BASIC track glide path incorporating more limited downside risk as compared to the ENHANCED track, demonstrates that the availability of a lower-risk, two-sided model is an effective way to encourage ACOs (including ACOs within a current agreement period, initial program entrants, re-entering ACOs, and renewing ACOs) to progress more rapidly to performance-based risk. For PY 2022, a majority of the 483 ACOs (284 (59 percent)) that currently participate in the Shared Savings Program, selected a two-sided model. Refer to Table 54.

While many ACOs have agreed to participate under a two-sided model, not all ACOs appear to be ready to take on performance-based risk. In 2020 and 2021, due to the PHE for COVID-19, as defined in § 400.200, we provided additional participation option flexibilities, allowing ACOs participating in the BASIC track's glide path the option to elect to forgo automatic advancement and “freeze” their participation for PY 2021 and PY 2022 at their PY 2020 and 2021 levels, respectively. (See May 2020 Interim Final Rule with comment period (IFC) (85 FR 27575 and 27576), CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84767 through 84769), and fiscal year (FY) 2022 Medicare Hospital Inpatient Prospective Payment Systems (IPPS)/Long-Term Care Hospital (LTCH) Prospective Payment System (PPS) final rule (86 FR 45502 through 45506)). Thus, eligible ACOs may have elected to remain in the same level of the BASIC track's glide path in which they participated during PY 2020 and PY 2021 once again, for PY 2022. As specified in the FY 2022 IPPS/LTCH PPS final rule (86 FR 45503 through 45506), for PY 2023, an ACO that elected one or both of these advancement deferral options will be automatically advanced to the level of the BASIC track's glide path in which it would have participated during PY 2023 if the ACO had advanced automatically to the required level of the BASIC track's glide path for PY 2021 and PY 2022, as applicable (unless the ACO elects to advance more quickly before the start of PY 2023). For ACOs that continued their participation in the Shared Savings Program into the next performance year, when given the opportunity to freeze at the ACO's current BASIC track level on the glide path, most eligible ACOs under a one-side model (Level A or Level B) chose to remain in a one-sided model:

• 140/157 (89 percent) currently participating ACOs chose to maintain their participation in a one-sided model rather than move to risk for PY 2021.

• 103/140 (74 percent) chose to maintain their participation in a one-sided model rather than move to risk for PY 2022.

As we have addressed several times through previous rulemakings, an ongoing consideration for CMS is how long ACOs should be allowed to participate under a one-sided model. We have to balance our goal of driving the greatest possible shift to high-value care delivery, which we believe may be incentivized most effectively under a two-sided model, with concern that requiring ACOs to take on too much downside risk too quickly will disincentivize program participation and reduce the program's potential to positively affect the quality and cost of care furnished to beneficiaries. Although we continue to believe there are stronger incentives for increased efficiency when ACOs are in a two-sided risk track, ACOs continue to report that they are constrained by the current participation options and need more time to invest in infrastructure and redesigned care processes for high quality and efficient health care service delivery before transitioning to performance-based risk. Additionally, some ACOs have reported that the ENHANCED track is too risky, and therefore, requiring ACOs to eventually move to ENHANCED may hinder continued participation. Therefore, we believe it would be prudent to provide greater flexibility for ACOs to join the program under the one-sided model and to remain in the program under lower levels of performance-based risk in order to balance our desire to see more ACOs participate under performance-based risk while also working towards our goal of increasing overall Shared Savings Program participation and improving outcomes for beneficiaries, including high need beneficiaries with complex health and social needs who may most benefit from ACOs' linked networks of clinicians with incentives to close inequitable gaps in care associated with poorer health outcomes. 266 267

266 McWilliams JM, Landon BE, Chernew ME, Zaslavsky AM. Changes in patients' experiences in Medicare accountable care organizations. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(18):1715-1724. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa1406552. 267 Seshamani M, Jacobs DB. Leveraging Medicare to Advance Health Equity. JAMA. 2022;327(18):1757-1758. doi:10.1001/jama.2022.6613.

We note that the Shared Savings Program was established as, and remains, a voluntary program for providers and suppliers that choose to participate in an ACO and to become accountable for the quality and cost of care for an assigned population of Medicare FFS beneficiaries. Thus, to promote the program's goal of ACO accountability for the quality and cost of care furnished to assigned beneficiaries, we believe it would be appropriate to allow certain ACOs in their first agreement period in the program to maintain participation in a one-sided model (with a lower sharing rate) for a longer period of time, rather than risk having those ACOs leave the program altogether to avoid transitioning to two-sided risk before the ACO is confident it has been able to implement the systemic changes necessary to deliver high quality, value-based care. Even if an ACO does not earn shared savings, ACOs have demonstrated that they are likely saving Trust Fund dollars by modifying their ACO participants' behavior to coordinate care and carry out other interventions to improve quality and financial performance. In particular, ACOs with average to above-average baseline spending may decide that a benchmark with a neutral or negative regional adjustment presents too much exposure to performance-based risk if they are also required to participate under a two-sided model, but they may otherwise elect to participate and begin to reduce spending if permitted to join and remain under a one-sided model.

In light of these considerations, we are concerned that our current policy of considering an ACO's status as a high- or low revenue ACO (as these terms are defined in § 425.20) in determining the participation options available to the ACO may disincentivize certain providers and suppliers from forming ACOs or joining existing ACOs. At the start of July 1, 2019, 52 percent of the participating ACOs met the definition of “high revenue ACO.” For PY 2020, 48 percent of participating ACOs were high revenue ACOs, for PY 2021, 46 percent of participating ACOs were high revenue ACOs, and for PY 2022, 44 percent of participating ACOs are high revenue. In all, the share of participating ACOs that meet the definition of high revenue ACO has decreased by 8 percentage points over 3 participation years in a consistent downward trajectory.

It is not our intent to incentivize ACOs to exclude high cost providers and suppliers from their ACO participant lists to avoid meeting the definition of high revenue ACO. We believe participation in the Shared Savings Program encourages providers and suppliers to provide better coordinated, more efficient care for beneficiaries and results in savings for the Trust Funds. High revenue ACOs, which typically include hospitals as ACO participants, have a greater opportunity to control assigned beneficiaries' total Medicare Parts A and B FFS expenditures, as they coordinate a larger portion of the assigned beneficiaries' care across care settings (83 FR 41916 through 41918). As a result, we believe it is important to provide participation options that will encourage more providers and suppliers, including those with high revenues, to participate in the Shared Savings Program.

In addition, given the feedback we have received from ACOs and other interested parties, as well as our observation of trends in ACO participation, we believe ACOs inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, regardless of their status as a high or low revenue ACO, may be more likely to participate in the program if they are allowed more time under a one-sided model than is currently allowed under the available participation options. As discussed in the December 2018 final rule, some commenters opposed limiting high revenue ACOs to one agreement period in the BASIC track. Given that high revenue ACOs are responsible for a greater share of Medicare Part A and Part B FFS spending than low revenue ACOs, one commenter agreed that it is reasonable to ask high revenue ACOs to assume greater levels of risk and/or at a faster pace than low revenue ACOs. But this commenter also suggested that CMS should take into account that larger health systems must invest in change across a much broader delivery “footprint” and so may require additional investments over multiple years to make transformative system changes, and also need a longer time to recoup investments (such as in the form of shared savings). Similarly, we heard from at least one interested party that high revenue ACOs need more of an on-ramp to meaningful levels of two-sided risk because there are bigger systemic policies in place that take time to modify in order to create changes within the organization that focus on providing value-based care.

As noted above in section III.G.2.a.(2), CMS has outlined a renewed vision and strategy for how the Innovation Center will drive health system transformation to achieve equitable outcomes through high-quality, affordable, person-centered care for all beneficiaries. Further, in a January 2022 article, CMS stated our goal that 100 percent of people with Original Medicare will be in a care relationship with accountability for quality and total cost of care by 2030. 268 The Shared Savings Program is the largest Medicare alternative payment model with 483 ACOs participating in PY 2022 and 11 million assigned beneficiaries. 269 As a result, the Shared Savings Program will play an important role in achieving the goal of creating care relationships with accountability for quality and costs for all Medicare FFS beneficiaries.

268 Seshamani, M, Fowler E, Brooks-LaSure C. et al. Building On The CMS Strategic Vision: Working Together For A Stronger Medicare. Health Affairs. January 11, 2022. Available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/forefront.20220110.198444.22 January . doi:10.1377/forefront.20220110.198444.

269 See Medicare Shared Savings Program Fast Facts (January 2022), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2022-shared-savings-program-fast-facts.pdf .

We believe APMs are well positioned to close gaps in health equity. Under the Shared Savings Program, ACOs are incentivized to provide high quality care while reducing unnecessary duplication of services and preventing medical errors. We believe it is important to encourage providers and suppliers who are providing care to high needs beneficiaries to join and/or form ACOs to help close gaps in health equity. We also believe flexibility with respect to the timeline for progression to two-sided risk is important in the Shared Savings Program to encourage small, rural, safety-net providers to form ACOs or to join larger, more urban practices to share resources. Both of these strategies can be utilized to help provide high need beneficiaries served by small, rural, safety-net providers with the resources to better coordinate their care and improve outcomes.

(2) 5-Year Agreement Period Under a One-Sided Model for Eligible ACOs

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we proposed to allow certain ACOs more time under a one-sided model and more flexibility in transitioning to higher levels of risk and potential reward by modifying the participation options available under the Shared Savings Program. As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, while the proposal for currently participating ACOs to elect to maintain their participation at Level A or Level B for the remainder of their current agreement period would apply beginning January 1, 2023, we proposed to make all other policies outlined in this section effective for agreement periods starting on or after January 1, 2024, rather than January 1, 2023, because the majority of the application cycle for the 2023 performance year will occur before this rule is finalized. Establishing a January 1, 2024 start date for these changes would allow ACOs time to understand the scope of the proposed changes more fully before making decisions related to their participation, and would allow CMS adequate time to update its processes and application-related guidance documents for the new participation options, if finalized.

First, we proposed to add § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 ) to allow an ACO that enters the BASIC track's glide path at Level A under § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A)( 1 ) and is currently at Level A to elect to remain in Level A under § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A)( 1 ) for all subsequent performance years of the agreement period, for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024. Per proposed § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 )( i ), in order to be eligible to participate under Level A of the BASIC track for subsequent years of the agreement period as described in § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 ), an ACO must meet the following requirements: the ACO is participating in its first agreement period under the BASIC track under § 425.600(a)(4), and is not participating in an agreement period under the BASIC track as a renewing ACO (as defined in § 425.20) or a re-entering ACO (as defined in § 425.20) that previously participated in the BASIC track's glide path under § 425.600(a)(4); and the ACO is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives (as defined in § 425.20). We proposed to extend this participation option to re-entering former Track 1 ACOs, because they have not previously participated in the BASIC track glide path and we explained our desire to encourage them to begin participating in the program again. Eligibility for this participation option would not consider the ACO's revenue status.

For eligible ACOs, prior to the automatic advancement of the ACO to Level B, the ACO could elect to remain in Level A for all subsequent performance years of the agreement period. At § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 )( ii ), we proposed to require that this voluntary election by an ACO to remain in Level A for the entirety of its first agreement period be made in the form and manner and by a deadline established by CMS. In the case of an ACO that elects to remain in Level A for the entirety of its first agreement period, the ACO generally would be eligible to enter into a subsequent agreement period under the BASIC track's glide path, giving the ACO 2 additional years of no risk under the one-sided model. If an eligible ACO made this election and did not elect faster advancement to a higher level of risk and potential reward, the ACO would have 7 years under the one-sided model, whereas a new ACO entering under the BASIC track's glide path may be eligible for as few as 2 performance years under the one-sided model under the current participation options. We noted our belief that that allowing a maximum of 7 years under the one-sided model would strike a more appropriate balance within the current structure of 5 performance year agreement periods and the BASIC track glide path, which provides for 2 years under the one-sided model. Currently, ACOs inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives generally are limited to 2 years under a one-sided model, which ACOs have informed us is not enough time before transitioning to risk. We noted our belief that giving ACOs longer than the proposed 7 years or potentially unlimited time under a one-sided model would dilute the program's ability to meaningfully influence expenditures and quality through the incentives provided by ACO risk assumption. As proposed, the change to extend the time eligible ACOs may remain under a one-sided model would allow ACOs more time to make investments in care improvement and to capitalize on those investments, while still working to lower costs and improve care quality for their assigned beneficiaries.

Although we proposed to increase the potential time certain ACOs may spend in the one-sided model, the proposal included a pathway to transition these ACOs into two-sided risk. We noted that we continue to recognize that ACOs are best able to select their participation options to meet the needs of their organizations, including when to time their transition to performance-based risk, including within an agreement period. We proposed to add a new § 425.600(g)(1)(i) to provide that an ACO that is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives may participate in the BASIC track glide path for a maximum of 2 agreement periods (once at Level A for all 5 performance years and a second time in progression on the glide path). Furthermore, we noted that the ability to enter a second agreement period in the BASIC track's glide path would be limited by proposed § 425.600(g)(1)(ii), which would provide that an ACO that enters an agreement at either Level A or Level B is deemed to have completed one agreement under the BASIC track's glide path and would only be eligible to enter a second agreement under the BASIC track's glide path if the ACO continues to meet the definition of inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and satisfied either of the following: The ACO is the same legal entity as a current or previous ACO that previously entered into a participation agreement for participation in the BASIC track's glide path only one time; or for a new ACO identified as a re-entering ACO, the ACO in which the majority of the new ACO's participants were participating previously entered into a participation agreement for participation in the BASIC track's glide path only one time. At paragraph (g)(1)(iii), we proposed that an ACO that is determined to be inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives but is not eligible to enter the BASIC track's glide path may enter either the BASIC track Level E for all performance years of the agreement period, or the ENHANCED track. For example, an ACO that voluntarily terminates its participation agreement during its first agreement under Level A of the BASIC track's glide path and chooses to re-enter the BASIC track under proposed § 425.600(g)(1)(ii) would be re-entering a second agreement and, if continuing to meet the definition of inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, could progress along the BASIC track glide path for this second agreement period. For its third agreement, the ACO would be required to enter the BASIC track at Level E for all years of the agreement period, or the ENHANCED track. As proposed, the provisions would prevent ACOs from terminating their participation agreement before transitioning to two-sided risk in order to stay under the one-sided model, potentially indefinitely.

We also proposed to add § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( vi ) to allow currently participating ACOs that are participating in the BASIC track at Level A or Level B for PY 2022 to elect to continue in their current level of the BASIC track glide path for PY 2023 and continuing for the remainder of the agreement period. If the ACO does not elect to remain under Level A or Level B, for PY 2023, the ACO would be automatically advanced to the next level of the BASIC track's glide path to which the ACO would have automatically advanced absent any election to maintain its participation level for PY 2022 and, if applicable, the election to maintain its participation level for PY 2021 under § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( iii ), unless the ACO elects to transition to a higher level of risk and potential reward within the BASIC track's glide path as provided in § 425.226(a)(2)(i). We proposed to modify § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( iv ) to account for the proposed new election option under paragraph ( vi ). We also proposed to add § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( vii ) to extend this participation option to eligible ACOs that begin an agreement period in Level A or Level B on January 1, 2023.

We recognized we proposed to implement participation option changes in the middle of an agreement period for currently participating ACOs in the BASIC track Level A or Level B. However, we proposed to allow these ACOs to elect to remain at the level in which they are currently participating for PY 2022 for the remainder of their current agreement period, and to offer a similar option to ACOs that enter an agreement period starting under Level A or Level B of the BASIC track glide path beginning on January 1, 2023, because we noted that we wished to encourage continuity of participation in the program and did not see any advantage to excluding currently participating ACOs and ACOs with participation agreements beginning on January 1, 2023, from the same participation option that we proposed to make available to newly participating ACOs inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives that begin a new agreement period on or after January 1, 2024. We proposed that, in the case of a currently participating ACO that elects to remain in Level A or Level B under proposed § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( vi ) or ( vii ) for the remainder of its current agreement period, the ACO would be eligible to enter into a subsequent agreement period under the BASIC track's glide path pursuant to § 425.600(g)(1)(ii), giving the ACO an opportunity to participate for up to 2 additional years under the one-sided model. For performance year 3 of this subsequent agreement period, the ACO would be automatically advanced to Level C and to each successive level of risk and potential reward for each performance year thereafter, unless the ACO elects to transition to a higher level of risk and potential reward within the BASIC track's glide path as provided in § 425.226(a)(2)(i). We proposed to require that this voluntary election by an ACO to remain in the one-sided model in Level A or Level B for the remainder of its current agreement period be made in the form and manner and by a deadline established by CMS.

Consistent with the proposal to expand the participation options for renewing and re-entering ACOs, we proposed to make changes to the definition of Performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative in § 425.20 and to the regulation at § 425.224(a)(4) to allow a renewing or re-entering ACO that was previously under a one-sided model of the BASIC track's glide path (Level A or B) to reapply for participation in the BASIC track's glide path, provided the ACO is not identified as having also participated previously under a two-sided model. We explained that the proposed change to the definition of Performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative in § 425.20 would be effective for performance years beginning on January 1, 2023 and for subsequent years. Specifically, we proposed to amend the definition of Performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative in § 425.20, including to add a new paragraph (1)(ii) to apply to performance years beginning January 1, 2023 and in subsequent years, to include only Levels C through E of the BASIC track, and to remove the one-sided Levels A and B from the definition. Similarly, in § 425.224(a)(4), we proposed to remove the reference to “a one-sided model of the BASIC track's glide path (Level A or Level B),” so that renewing and re-entering ACOs that previously participated in a one-sided model of the BASIC track's glide path but that are not identified as having participated in a two-sided model, are not limited to reapplying for participation in a two-sided model.

Because the annual application and change request cycle began before the CY 2023 PFS final rule is issued, we noted that we would give ACOs currently participating in Level A or B of the BASIC track glide path the opportunity during the change request cycle to indicate whether they are interested in maintaining their participation at Level A or Level B under this proposed policy, should it be finalized. ACOs expressing such an interest would not be required to submit a repayment mechanism at that time. In the event this proposed policy were not finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we noted that ACOs that are required under § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 ) to advance from Level A or Level B to a two-sided risk model for PY 2023 would have a limited opportunity to submit a repayment mechanism, resolve any deficiencies, and have it approved in time for the start of the performance year. ACOs that failed to establish a repayment mechanism that complies with the requirements of § 425.204(f) by the deadline specified by CMS would be terminated as required under § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 3 ).

In order to determine an ACO's eligibility to participate under the proposed new participation options, we proposed to consider an ACO's experience with performance-based Medicare ACO initiatives only, rather than also considering the ACO's status as a high or low revenue ACO. Our proposal would make the ENHANCED track optional for all ACOs, regardless of experience with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, because we do not wish to disincentivize the formation of ACOs that include high-cost providers (that is, high revenue ACOs), we proposed to no longer use revenue status for determining ACO participation options. As proposed, the provision also would simplify the determination of which participation options are available to a particular ACO and would reduce burden on ACOs (in terms of ascertaining likely available participation options) and CMS (in terms of determining ACO eligibility for its selected participation option). We proposed to modify the regulations in § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B) and § 425.600(d) to apply only to agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, and before January 1, 2024, and § 425.600(e) to apply only to performance years beginning on or after July 1, 2019, and before January 1, 2024, because these complex provisions depend on the ACO's status as a high or low revenue ACO. The distinction that § 425.600(e) would apply to performance years, rather than to agreement periods, aligns with our proposal to make the ENHANCED track optional. With that change, it no longer would be necessary to monitor low revenue ACOs identified as experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives for changes in the revenue of ACO participants that would cause the ACO to be considered a high revenue ACO, and therefore, ineligible for participation in the BASIC track. For agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024, we proposed to streamline the specification of the BASIC track glide path in § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C) and eligibility for participation options in § 425.600(g), which would define an ACO's participation options based solely on the ACO's level of experience with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives.

We noted our belief that the determination of whether an ACO is inexperienced or experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives (as defined in § 425.20) could be affected by changes made by an ACO to its ACO participant list during the course of an agreement period, particularly for ACOs that are determined to be inexperienced when their agreement period begins but are close to the threshold percentage of 40 percent of ACO participants having participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative in any of the 5 most recent performance years prior to the agreement start date. Any approach under which we would apply different policies to ACOs based on the prior experience of an ACO's ACO participants with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives would need to recognize the potential for an ACO to add or remove ACO participants during the course of the agreement period, which could affect whether the ACO meets the definition of experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. We noted our concerns about the possibility that an ACO may begin participating under a one-sided, shared savings-only level of the BASIC track based on a determination that the ACO is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, and then quickly thereafter seek to add ACO participants experienced with performance-based risk, thereby avoiding the limitations under our proposed participation options regarding the availability of the one-sided model for experienced ACOs.

To protect against this circumstance, we proposed to add § 425.600(h) to provide that for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, CMS would monitor ACOs identified as inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and participating in the BASIC track under a one-sided model during an agreement period pursuant to a voluntary election under § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( vi ), (a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( vii ), or (a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 ) for changes to their ACO participant list that would cause an ACO to be considered experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and ineligible for participation in a one-sided model.

We further proposed to update the definitions of inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives under § 425.20 to allow for a rolling lookback period (applicable to both the assessment of an ACO's application to participate under a participation option for an agreement period and to ongoing compliance determinations as proposed at § 425.600(h)) of the 5 most recent performance years beginning from the current performance year being monitored. If an ACO meets the definition of experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives (as specified in § 425.20), we proposed under the new provision at § 425.600(h)(2)(i) that the ACO would be permitted to complete the remainder of its current performance year in a one-sided model of the BASIC track, but would be ineligible to continue participation in the one-sided model after the end of that performance year if it continues to meet the definition of experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and would be automatically advanced to Level E of the BASIC track at the start of the next performance year. As specified under proposed § 425.600(h)(2)(ii), the ACO would be required to meet all requirements to participate under performance-based risk, including establishing an adequate repayment mechanism as specified under § 425.204(f) and selecting a MSR/MLR from the options specified under § 425.605(b), in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( v ) or (a)(4)(i)(C)( 4 ), as applicable. If the ACO fails to meet the requirements to participate under performance-based risk, its agreement would be terminated in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 3 ) or § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 5 ), as applicable.

An eligible ACO that enters a new agreement period beginning on or after January 1, 2024, at Level A of the BASIC track would be permitted to elect to remain in Level A for the next performance year and remain at Level A for all subsequent performance years of the agreement period under proposed § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 ). We would review the ACO's proposed ACO participant list for each subsequent performance year and provide feedback to allow the ACO to assess if the proposed changes to its ACO participant list (if any) would yield a determination that the ACO qualifies as experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives based on the 5 most recent performance years prior to the performance year under review (for example, PY 2020 through PY 2024, if PY 2025 were under review). CMS would perform the same monitoring activity ahead of all subsequent performance years of the agreement period in which the ACO elected to remain in Level A under proposed § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 ).

If the ACO were to meet the definition of experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives based on the proposed ACO participant list for the performance year under review, the ACO would still be permitted to complete that performance year in Level A of the BASIC track. CMS would then reassess the proposed ACO participant list for the subsequent performance year. If at that point the ACO has made changes to its ACO participant list such that it no longer meets the definition of experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, the ACO would be permitted to complete that subsequent performance year in Level A of the BASIC track. But if the ACO continues to meet the definition of performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives based on its proposed ACO participant list for the subsequent performance year, the ACO would be automatically advanced to Level E of the BASIC track for that performance year, provided the ACO met all requirements to participate under performance-based risk. If the ACO did not meet all requirements to participate under performance-based risk, including establishment of an adequate repayment mechanism and selection of an available MSR/MLR, the ACO's participation agreement would be terminated.

Our proposed approach to monitoring of risk experience for agreement periods under Level A of the BASIC track was illustrated in a table in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, which we duplicate in Table 55. As shown, hypothetical ACOs A and B begin a Shared Savings Program agreement period on January 1, 2024, and for that performance year, are determined to be inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. Both ACOs are monitored ahead of PY 2025 as proposed, and both continue to meet the definition of inexperience with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives based on their proposed ACO participant lists for PY 2025. Consistent with their status as inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, both ACO A and ACO B elect to maintain their participation at level A of the BASIC track for all years of the agreement period, as proposed in § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 ). Ahead of PY 2026, both ACOs are determined to be experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives based on their proposed ACO participant lists for PY 2026. Both ACOs are permitted to remain at Level A of the BASIC track for PY 2026, but will continue to be monitored by CMS. Ahead of PY 2027, the proposed ACO participant list for ACO A for PY 2027 is reviewed and the ACO is determined to be inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, and ACO A is thus permitted to continue its agreement under Level A of the BASIC track for PY 2027. However, ACO B is determined to continue to meet the definition of experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives based on its proposed ACO participant list for PY 2027, and therefore, is advanced to Level E of the BASIC track for PY 2027 and must remain there for the remainder of its agreement period.

Our intention in proposing these policies was to provide ACOs with a more gradual on-ramp to taking on two-sided risk and to allow them the flexibility they need to best ensure their readiness to take on two-sided risk. In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we noted our belief that the proposals would encourage more ACOs to form and join the program, as well as encourage currently participating ACOs to remain in the program. Additionally, we noted our belief that the proposals would help to increase our participation options so that an ACO has more flexibility to select the option that best fits its circumstances when applying to participate in the Shared Savings Program.

Increasing the participation options in the program by expanding the flexibilities for participation in the one-sided model would also be expected to promote health equity for underserved and vulnerable beneficiaries by providing ACOs and their ACO participants with an additional opportunity to close gaps in care for underserved populations before they are required to transition to performance-based risk. These additional flexibilities would also afford ACOs that serve high-need beneficiaries or face greater start-up costs with more time to prepare to take on two-sided risk, as well as allowing ACOs to balance their response to the COVID-19 pandemic, while also managing normal operations, implementing care redesigns and improving the quality of care provided to beneficiaries.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposal for a 5-year agreement period under a one-sided model for eligible ACOs and our responses:

Comment: Most commenters were supportive of CMS' proposal to allow ACOs inexperienced with performance-based risk to remain in Level A of the BASIC track during their first agreement period. These commenters emphasized that the transition to performance-based risk under the current glide path often proves challenging and can deter participation by driving ACOs out of the program if they are forced to assume risk too quickly. Many commenters expressed that ACOs generate increased shared savings over the duration of program participation, and thus, these gains could be hindered by a requirement to quickly transition to risk that resulted in ACOs leaving the program rather than taking on risk. Commenters also noted that ACOs that include as ACO participants FQHCs providing care in medically underserved areas are often more hesitant to take on risk, as these health centers incur unique financial risks due to their location in medically underserved areas and by providing care to all patients, regardless of ability to pay. Commenters noted that they believe that this proposal would encourage Shared Savings Program participation and emphasized that the extended on-ramp to two-sided risk, as proposed, would allow sufficient time for ACOs to build infrastructure and the processes necessary to be successful in the program by gathering data and funding, refining programs, designing care delivery and practice patterns, and developing physician leader experience.

Many commenters praised the potential equity implications of the proposed change, saying it would aid ACOs that incur higher costs when serving vulnerable populations and enable them to allocate funds to address social determinants of health. Other commenters maintained that it would encourage diverse participation in the Shared Savings Program, with one commenter saying it would encourage community clinic ACO participation, another highlighting that the flexibility and stability would provide an incentive for providers and suppliers serving complex patients and for small non-profit organizations to form or join ACOs, and another pointing to how it would assist providers and suppliers in rural areas and safety-net organizations. Another commenter stated that the proposed policy would be especially beneficial for new ACOs that are inexperienced with performance-based risk and low revenue ACOs, especially when paired with the advance investment payment proposals, and would attract ACOs to participate in the Shared Savings Program that, absent these policies, would have been unable to consider participation. Commenters highlighted that participation in the one-sided model can yield meaningful outcomes and savings. Multiple stakeholders urged CMS to place less emphasis on revenue status, which was reflected in our proposed shift to only using performance-based risk experience (not revenue status) as a determinant for participation options.

Response: We agree with commenters who emphasized that the extended on-ramp to two-sided risk will allow ACOs more time to develop the healthcare delivery infrastructure to successfully manage the patient experience across the continuum of care and to be able to gather data, educate staff, and refine practice patterns that improve quality of care and reduce the costs of care. We appreciate the insight from commenters that these new flexibilities will encourage participation among rural area providers, safety-net providers, and providers serving high-need populations, which will in turn help increase the diversity of beneficiaries receiving accountable care.

Comment: Several commenters argued that two-sided risk is necessary to drive reduction in spending and invest in transforming care delivery.

Response: We agree that two-sided risk has proven to be effective in encouraging many ACOs to reduce spending; however, we also believe that allowing more time under a one-sided model will provide more ACOs with the time that they need to make the needed preparations, such as adopting new technologies and processes that will allow them to successfully take on two-sided risk while also achieving meaningful cost and quality improvements. Data have shown that ACOs can take between 1-3 years to become accustomed to the Shared Savings Program 270 and that ACOs are more likely to leave the program when they are unprepared to take on two-sided risk. 271 We note that the rapid progression to two-sided risk is a barrier to entry and continued participation by some ACOs, as noted by several ACO and provider group commenters in response to the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule. We acknowledge that two-sided risk is an effective tool to drive investment in cost-saving measures and quality of care improvements, but we have observed that providers and suppliers that participate in a one-sided model are also able to realize shared savings while improving quality of care for patients. We also believe that ACOs that successfully earn shared savings under two-sided risk generally made the transition to risk when the ACO was confident that its care coordination strategies were sufficiently mature and well-implemented to successfully reduce spending. Recognizing that this point of readiness may arrive sooner for some ACOs than for others, we would like to provide more ACOs the time they need to gain that same confidence to succeed. Furthermore, we have received comments from many ACOs and practitioner groups that allowing ACOs to remain in a one-sided model would allow them to make the investments needed to improve quality of care and develop processes to manage total cost of care in anticipation of assuming two-sided risk. As such, it is our belief that finalizing the ability for some ACOs to remain in a one-sided model for an extended period of time as proposed will encourage new and continued participation by ACOs, resulting in the continued success of the Shared Savings Program.

270 “The Medicare Shared Savings Program In 2020: Positive Movement (And Uncertainty) During A Pandemic”, Health Affairs Blog, October 14, 2021. DOI: 10.1377/hblog20211008.785640.

271 “Why Do Accountable Care Organizations Leave The Medicare Shared Savings Program?”, Health Affairs Blog, May 6, 2019. DOI: 10.1377/hlthaff.2018.05097.

Comment: One commenter stated that the proposed changes may result in well-resourced providers and suppliers that are capable of moving to two-sided risk remaining in a one-sided model longer than necessary. Other commenters noted that there are financial incentives for ACOs ready to assume two-sided risk to continue forward along the BASIC track glide path and to the ENHANCED track, since the higher levels of risk are accompanied by higher levels of potential reward through higher available sharing rates.

Response: We agree with the commenters that noted the significant financial incentives that encourage high-performing ACOs to continue forward along the glide path to risk, since the current and the proposed participation options compensate the assumption of risk (and higher levels of risk) with the corresponding opportunity for greater reward. Further, we believe that one-sided model participation provides incentives for providers and suppliers to manage total cost of care and make improvements in care quality while also providing stability, sustainability, and flexibility to providers and suppliers serving rural areas, safety-net providers, and providers and suppliers in underserved areas. We acknowledge that moving to two-sided risk further increases these incentives, and by allowing these ACOs more time in a one-sided model, they will have time to mature the infrastructure needed to confidently move into two-sided risk.

Comment: MedPAC suggested an ACO should not be able to benefit from both 7 years under a one-sided model and a positive regional adjustment to its benchmark, as this could result in an ACO earning shared savings without making any demonstrable improvements in care delivery or cost reduction. They suggested that CMS also consider implementing criteria that would assess if an ACO received a positive regional adjustment to its baseline expenditures when determining if an ACO is eligible for additional years in BASIC track Level A or Level B.

Response: We acknowledge MedPAC's concern that ACOs with a positive regional adjustment could elect to participate for an extended time in the one-sided model. We note that in recent years around 90 percent of ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program have received a positive regional adjustment, and thus implementing a restriction such as the one suggested by MedPAC would largely moot the proposal to allow ACOs inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives to participate for a full agreement period under Level A of the BASIC track, followed by a second agreement period in the BASIC track's glide path. We appreciate MedPAC's concerns around potential ACO behavior during an extended period under a one-sided model and will continue to analyze ACO trends and may take this suggestion into consideration in future rulemaking.

Further, we acknowledge that ACOs that would benefit from a positive regional adjustment are incentivized to participate in the Shared Savings Program as their spending is already low compared to the region, and that selective participation by these ACOs may help to explain why the large majority of current ACOs receive a positive regional adjustment. Because we believe that the proposal to allow extended participation in the one-sided model will appeal especially to ACOs and potential ACOs that are currently reluctant to join or remain in the Shared Savings Program, such as those that would receive a negative regional adjustment, we believe that finalizing this extended participation in the one-sided model as proposed will increase Shared Savings Program participation, including by ACOs that will not receive a positive regional adjustment.

We also note that there are existing guardrails on positive regional adjustments in place, as discussed in III.G.5.c.(5) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule. For an ACO that has lower spending compared to its regional service area (that is, an ACO that would receive a positive regional adjustment), the weight applied to the regional adjustment is 35 percent for the first agreement period in which the ACO is subject to a regional adjustment and 50 percent in the ACO's second and subsequent agreement periods subject to a regional adjustment. Perhaps more importantly, we cap the per capita dollar amount of the regional adjustment for each Medicare enrollment type at a dollar amount equal to positive or negative 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program in benchmark year (BY) 3 for assignable beneficiaries (as defined in § 425.20) in that Medicare enrollment type identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3 (§ 425.601(a)(8)(ii)(C)) (sometimes referred to as the “symmetrical cap” on the regional adjustment). The current schedule of weights described in § 425.601(f)) and the symmetrical cap on the regional adjustment described in § 425.601(a)(8)(ii)(C)) were designed to address a dynamic where the regional adjustment could provide overly inflated benchmarks for ACOs that are relatively low spending compared to their region (that is, ACOs that receive a positive regional adjustment), while ACOs with higher spending compared to their region (that is, ACOs that receive a negative regional adjustment) may find little value in remaining in the program when faced with a significantly reduced benchmark. As we have previously explained, these policies are designed to prevent windfall shared savings payments for ACOs that have relatively low spending levels relative to their region (83 FR 67822).

Comment: Some commenters were supportive of allowing more time in a one-sided model, but suggested that CMS should provide more scrutiny and/or requirements to demonstrate improvements in care delivery when determining which ACOs would be allowed to continue to participate in a one-sided model for an extended time.

Response: We believe that the requirements governing which ACOs may participate in a one-sided model for up to 7 years are sufficient to ensure inexperienced ACOs that will best benefit from these arrangements are encouraged to participate in the program, while also excluding from this participation option experienced ACOs that do not need the additional time in a one-sided model to develop the processes and infrastructure needed for success in the Shared Savings Program. Additionally, we note that ACOs are subject to measuring and reporting metrics relative to their performance in the Shared Savings Program, such as quality reporting, and that CMS routinely conducts compliance monitoring of ACOs. We believe that the systems and processes already established provide sufficient oversight into how ACOs are using the additional time in a one-sided model.

Comment: Many commenters supported the proposed policy to allow new ACOs inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives up to seven years in a one-sided model of the Shared Savings Program and several included requests for CMS about its implementation. One commenter urged CMS to provide data for glide path level selection, such as information about our expected determination of the ACO's experience with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, with ample time before a decision on glide path level needs to be made, ensuring the election process is not burdensome and allows for transparency and sufficient information for educated decision making by ACOs.

Response: We appreciate the commenters suggestion, and we plan to inform ACOs of these participation option changes using education and outreach to ACOs on the available participation options through various methods, including ACO coordinators, guidance documents, tip sheets, FAQs, and a biweekly newsletter to assist ACOs as they navigate to higher levels of risk and potential reward throughout their participation in the program. Information about an ACO's experience with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives is also communicated at standardized intervals during each application/change request cycle.

Comment: One commenter urged CMS to address potential gaming around this policy so that its implementation encourages new entity participation in the Shared Savings Program and does not allow inexperienced ACOs to enter a one-sided model, terminate its participation before moving to two-sided risk, and reenter another agreement in a one-sided model.

Response: We note that we proposed a number of safeguards to prevent the situation described in the comment, including in § 425.600(g)(1)(ii) and (h), to limit ACO gaming opportunities to continue to enter into one-sided model agreements after terminating a participation agreement and to engage in ACO participant churn. Under § 425.600(g)(1)(ii), an ACO that enters an agreement at either Level A or Level B is deemed to have completed one agreement under the BASIC track's glide path and would only be eligible to enter a second agreement under the BASIC track's glide path if the ACO continues to meet the definition of inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and satisfied either of the following: The ACO is the same legal entity as a current or previous ACO that previously entered into a participation agreement for participation in the BASIC track's glide path only one time; or for a new ACO identified as a re-entering ACO, the ACO in which the majority of the new ACO's participants were participating previously entered into a participation agreement for participation in the BASIC track's glide path only one time. Under § 425.600(h), for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, CMS will monitor ACOs identified as inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and participating in the BASIC track under a one-sided model during an agreement period pursuant to a voluntary election under §§§ 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( vi ), (a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( vii ), or (a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 ) for changes to their ACO participant list that cause an ACO to be considered experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and ineligible for participation in a one-sided model.

Comment: Several commenters suggested adjustments to proposals outlined in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule. In terms of monitoring ACOs for experience with performance-based risk and the proposal to move an ACO previously determined to be inexperienced with performance-based risk to Level E if its ACO participant list later causes it to qualify as experienced with performance-based risk, several commenters suggested allowing those ACOs to choose between advancing to Level C, Level D, or Level E. A couple commenters urged CMS to eliminate categorization as experienced or inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives for individual practitioners, as the commenter suggested that experience with risk does not correlate to greater success in lowering cost or improving quality by individual physician practices, and rather has more to do with leadership and management of the ACO. Several commenters suggested CMS should tie transition timelines for moving from a one-sided model to two-sided risk to metrics that evaluate an ACO's performance and progress.

Response: We believe our proposals strike an appropriate balance between allowing additional time in one-sided models and moving ACOs that begin to qualify as experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives to an appropriate level of two-sided risk. Our performance-based risk experience monitoring proposal allows ACOs one full performance year to make adjustments to their ACO participant lists once a formerly inexperienced ACO that is participating in Level A of the BASIC track for the entire agreement period starts to qualify as experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. If after that period, the ACO is still found to be experienced with performance-based risk, we believe it is reasonable for that ACO to move to Level E of the BASIC track in line with the participation options available to other ACOs that are experienced with performance-based risk. We believe our proposal appropriately addresses how an ACO and/or ACO participants are determined to be experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. Our proposal includes an updated definition of performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives in § 425.20, including only Levels C through E of the BASIC track, and removing the one-sided Levels A and B from the definition. This change will help prevent inexperienced ACOs from beginning to qualify as experienced during the ACO's agreement period, because ACO participants (including newly added ACO participants) with only prior BASIC track Level A or Level B experience will not cause the ACO to become experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives.

We continue to believe that risk experience and prior participation are relevant. The definition for experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives states that it is either the same legal entity or 40 percent or more of the ACO's ACO participants participated under performance-based risk (§ 425.20). A single independent practice is unlikely to deem an entire ACO as experienced with performance-based risk. However, a collection of independent practices that have all participated together under the same ACO, could if they make up at least 40 percent of the ACO participants on the ACO participant list. As the entities have participated together under performance-based risk, we do believe that experience does correlate to working together to lower costs and provide high quality care to beneficiaries.

We do not want to force ACOs to take on two-sided risk before they are ready and would like ACOs to successfully participate in the Shared Savings Program. However, we have observed that ACOs in performance-based risk tracks have better financial performance than ACOs in shared savings-only tracks, so we would like to provide ACOs adequate time to move towards performance-based risk and to continue under risk once they have move to a two-sided model. While we appreciate commenters' suggestion to require ACOs to meet certain performance metrics in order to remain in the one-sided model for an extended period of time, we note that we currently monitor ACOs for their compliance with quality performance standards under § 425.316(c) and financial performance under § 425.316(d) and we can take pre-termination actions identified under § 425.216 if CMS concludes that termination of an ACO from the Shared Savings Program is warranted. We will continue to monitor and, if necessary, refine our approach to performance monitoring and determining available participation options in future rulemaking. We hope to find the right balance between providing strong incentives to deliver high quality care, while reducing spending and giving ACOs adequate time to implement changes that allow for successful participation.

Comment: One commenter suggested shortening the lookback period in the definition of “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” under § 425.20 to 2 years (from 5) to encourage continued growth of the Shared Savings Program.

Response: We appreciate the commenter's suggestion to shorten the lookback period for determining whether an ACO qualifies as inexperienced or experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. At this time, we are not considering making a change to the lookback period. We believe the longer lookback period mitigates the chances providers and suppliers will sit out from the Shared Savings Program for a relatively short time in order not to be considered experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. We believe 5 years provides less incentive for entities to join the program, leave, and rejoin under a one-sided model after a relatively short time. We believe these policies balance providing incentives for providers and suppliers to form ACOs and limit opportunities for gaming.

Comment: A few commenters suggested CMS provide additional technical assistance and resources to help ACOs successfully transition to two-sided risk.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' suggestion that CMS provide additional technical assistance and resources to transition to two-sided risk, and we will continue to develop appropriate materials and resources to support ACOs. We also encourage ACOs to participate in our learning system events to learn about successes and pitfalls other ACOs have experienced.

Comment: While supportive of the overall policy changes proposed for the Shared Savings Program participation options, some commenters suggested that ACOs that have already transitioned to two-sided risk should also have additional flexibilities, including the option to modify existing participation agreements. For example, a few commenters suggested CMS consider allowing ACOs currently participating at Level C or Level D of the BASIC track to elect to maintain at that level for the remainder of their current agreement period, similar to the proposal for qualifying ACOs in Levels A and B of the BASIC track, suggesting that this option would allow ACOs that are ready to move to two-sided risk but not ready to go to Level E additional time to grow more comfortable with risk while continuing to build their infrastructure.

Response: We note that some of the proposed changes would be available to ACOs already participating in the program, such as the ability for currently participating ACOs in Level A or Level B of the BASIC track to elect to maintain at that level for the remainder of their agreement period, and continue to believe that the BASIC track's glide path offers a gradual on-ramp to higher levels of risk and potential reward for ACOs when they begin to take on two-sided risk. Many currently participating ACOs have had the opportunity to benefit from the election to maintain their participation level in PYs 2021 and 2022, allowing many to have extended time in a one-sided model, or in Level C or Level D of the BASIC track. Additionally, all ACOs would benefit from the proposal to make the ENHANCED track optional, with ACOs in the ENHANCED track having the new option to move back to Level E of the BASIC track. Therefore, we do not believe it is necessary to offer an option for ACOs currently participating in Level C or Level D of the BASIC track glide path to elect to freeze their participation at one of those levels for more than one performance year.

Comment: One commenter encouraged CMS to consider the tradeoffs of having a program with fewer ACOs that requires ACOs to take on higher levels of two-sided risk, which therefore acts as a more powerful incentive to decrease costs while maintaining or improving quality of care, versus a program with more ACOs that does not require them to take on such high levels of risk, which therefore does not drive as meaningful results for the Medicare Trust Funds and quality of care. The commenter also suggested that CMS consider transitioning the Shared Savings Program to a mandatory model. This commenter suggested that increasing participation in models with downside risk will require shifting to a mandatory model, and without a mandatory model, CMS will need to accept lower levels of participation in two-sided risk models.

Response: As we stated in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, the Shared Savings Program was established by statute as, and remains, a voluntary program for providers and suppliers that choose to participate in an ACO. For that reason, it is important that we implement the Shared Savings Program in a manner sufficiently attractive to ACOs and potential ACOs to encourage their participation and achievement of positive results for the Trust Funds and for the ACOs' assigned beneficiaries. Thus, we believe it is appropriate to allow certain ACOs in their first agreement period in the program to maintain participation in a one-sided model for a longer period of time, rather than risk having those ACOs leave the program altogether.

Comment: One commenter suggested CMS create a payment model for FQHCs and Critical Access/Rural Hospitals, that would remove unspecified barriers to participation by providers in cost-based reimbursement models and would allow such entities to participate for 7 years under a one-sided model. The commenter suggested the creation of a new model in order to allow FQHCs, RHCs, and CAHs to remain independent and not consolidate or join a convener organization. Another commenter suggested CMS establish a track where ACOs participate at full risk and could be eligible for 100 percent shared savings and shared losses. Another suggested a permanent upside-only model for physician-owned ACOs. Another commenter requested CMS reassess the cap on shared savings that cannot exceed 10 percent of updated benchmark for the BASIC track, but did not provide detail on how the cap should be adjusted.

Response: We appreciate the feedback; however, these suggestions are out of scope of the proposed rule. We will consider these suggestions for possible future rulemaking and have shared them with the Innovation Center.

Comment: Some commenters supported the policy for ACOs currently participating in Level A or Level B of the BASIC track to elect to maintain their participation for the remainder of the agreement period, but expressed concerns about the timing between the release of this final rule and the deadline for ACOs to select a Shared Savings Program track, especially if the proposals were not finalized. The commenters recommended that CMS allow for a renewal extension period for currently participating ACOs when making changes to the program's participation options to avoid wasting program resources if a policy change necessitates an ACO change their desired participation options, but did not elaborate on how that renewal extension period should operate. Another commenter shared similar sentiments about timing of this policy, and in the event CMS does not finalize the proposal to allow BASIC Track Level A or Level B ACOs to remain in their current level, urged CMS to allow ACOs moving to two-sided risk an opportunity to prepare their SNF 3-day rule waiver applications.

Response: We proposed to allow currently participating BASIC track ACOs to maintain participation under the one-sided model for the remainder of their current agreement period to allow these ACOs an opportunity for one full agreement period under a one-sided model, which we proposed to be available for qualifying ACOs entering new agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024. However, for new applicants and re-entering ACOs, we proposed for this policy to become effective beginning in 2024 to provide applicants and CMS adequate time to consider and implement the changes, as finalized, before the start of the application cycle to which they will apply.

After reviewing the comments received, we are finalizing, without modification, the proposal to offer a 5-year agreement period under a one-sided model of the BASIC track for eligible ACOs. Specifically, we are finalizing the proposal to amend paragraph (1)(i), redesignate paragraphs (1)(ii) and (1)(iii) as paragraphs (1)(iii) and (1)(iv), and add new paragraph (1)(ii) of the definition of Performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative in § 425.20. We are amending paragraph (1)(i) to apply to performance years beginning prior to January 1, 2023, and we are adding paragraph (1)(ii) to apply for performance years beginning January 1, 2023, and in subsequent years, to include only Levels C through E of the BASIC track, and to remove the one-sided Levels A and B from the definition. We are also finalizing as proposed, changes to the definition of “Experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” and “Inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” in § 425.20 by removing the phrase “prior to the agreement start date”. This change allows for a rolling lookback period (applicable to both the assessment of an ACO's application to participate under a participation option for an agreement period and to ongoing compliance determinations under proposed § 425.600(h)) of the 5 most recent performance years beginning from the current performance year being. We are also finalizing the amendatory instructions for § 425.20, to include corrections to typographical errors in punctuation. In § 425.224(a)(4), we are finalizing the proposal to remove the reference to “a one-sided model of the BASIC track's glide path (Level A or Level B),” so that renewing and re-entering ACOs that previously participated in a one-sided model of the BASIC track's glide path but that are not identified as having participated in a two-sided model are not limited to reapplying for participation in a two-sided model.

We are also finalizing as proposed our revisions to § 425.600. We are amending paragraph (a)(4)(i)(B) to apply to agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019 and before January 1, 2024. We are finalizing as proposed the new § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( vi) and (vii) to allow an ACO currently participating in Level A or Level B of the BASIC track to elect to remain at that level for the remainder of their agreement period for both performance year 2023 and performance year 2024, respectively, and corresponding changes to § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( ii ) and ( iv ). Additionally, we are finalizing as proposed the streamlining of the specification of the BASIC track glide path in § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C) for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024, which includes paragraphs related to the following: (1) glide path entry; (2) automatic advancement; (3) the option for eligible ACOs to elect to remain under a one-sided model; (4) requirements to be met before entering performance-based risk; (5) agreement termination for failure to meet certain requirements; and (6) automatic advancement along the BASIC track's glide path in performance years following an ACO's election to transition to a higher level of risk and reward.

Additionally, we are finalizing as proposed our revision to limit the monitoring of BASIC track ACOs identified as experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, during an agreement period, for changes in revenue, as specified under § 425.600(e) to apply to performance years beginning on or after July 1, 2019, and before January 1, 2024. We are finalizing as proposed the new paragraph (h) of § 425.600 applicable for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, to specify our approach for monitoring ACOs identified as inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and participating in the BASIC track under a one-sided model.

After consideration of the public comments, we are finalizing without modification the new § 425.600(g) which defines an ACO's participation options based solely on the ACO's level of experience with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024. Therefore, we are also finalizing as proposed the change at § 425.600(d) to limit it to agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, and before January 1, 2024.

We also sought comment on whether to extend the proposed option for certain ACOs inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives to spend an entire 5-year agreement period under the one-sided model of the BASIC track for an additional agreement period for low revenue ACOs that enter the BASIC track as a new legal entity (that has never before participated in the Shared Savings Program and is not identified as a renewing or re-entering ACO), so that these ACOs would be eligible for a second one-sided only agreement period followed by a third agreement period in the BASIC track glide path, which would include an additional 2 years under the one-sided model (for a total of 12 years under the one-sided model) before progressing to two-sided risk. We noted that we considered extending this participation option only to low revenue ACOs that enter the BASIC track as a new legal entity because other ACOs have already had time under the one-sided model, and therefore, do not need a second agreement period in one-sided only. Although, as we noted previously, using revenue status in determining the participation options available to ACOs may disincentivize certain providers and suppliers from forming ACOs or joining existing ACOs, we also noted that we have observed that there are differences in financial performance outcomes based on revenue status. An independent study found the first three entry cohorts of physician-group ACOs (ACOs whose core medical groups for beneficiary attribution were not associated with hospitals, which are generally low revenue) consistently reduced spending as their first agreement periods progressed such that average per beneficiary benefit spending was reduced by $300 in 2015 compared to only $37 lower for hospital-integrated ACOs (ACOs whose core medical groups for beneficiary attribution were part of larger organizations or health systems that included hospitals). 272 Therefore, we discussed that we estimated that this alternative could increase program retention for the type of ACO that, as a group, has demonstrated greater program savings under an upside-only incentive in the past (that is, low revenue ACOs inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives) and increase program savings (net of shared savings payments) by at least $1 billion.

272 McWilliams JM, et al. Medicare Spending After 3 Years of the Medicare Shared Savings Program. New England Journal of Medicine. Sept. 2018. 379:1139-1149. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMsa1803388.

As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, under this alternative, a voluntary election by a qualifying ACO to remain in Level A for the entirety of its second agreement period in the BASIC track would be made in the form and manner and by a deadline established by CMS. In the case of a qualifying ACO that elects to remain in Level A for the entirety of its second agreement period in the BASIC track that is determined to be low revenue at the time of application for renewal to a third agreement period in the BASIC track, the ACO generally would be eligible to enter into this subsequent agreement period under the BASIC track's glide path, giving the ACO 2 additional years under the one-sided model. If an eligible ACO made this election and did not elect faster advancement to a higher level of risk and potential reward, the ACO would have a total of 12 years under the one-sided model in the BASIC track.

As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, if we were to adopt this alternative, we noted our concern about the possibility that an ACO may be found eligible to continue for a full second agreement period under a one-sided model of the BASIC track because of a determination that it is an inexperienced, low revenue ACO at the time of application, and then quickly thereafter seek to add experienced and/or higher revenue ACO participants, thereby avoiding the requirement under our proposed participation options to move to the glide path for the second agreement period under the BASIC track if it did not meet the eligibility requirements to continue under the one-sided model for the entire agreement period. To protect against these circumstances, we noted we would continue monitoring for experience with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. Furthermore, we discussed that we would establish a monitoring policy to monitor for changes to revenue status during the ACO's second agreement period in the one-sided model of the BASIC track, to ensure that the ACO continues to meet the definition of a low revenue ACO (as well as an ACO inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives). We discussed that we would take the following approach to ensuring continued compliance of ACOs with the eligibility requirements for this alternative participation option. When an ACO applies for a second agreement period entirely under the one-sided model of the BASIC track, we would determine whether the ACO would be a high- or low revenue ACO (and an ACO inexperienced or experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives) as defined under § 425.20, using the ACO's ACO participant list for the first performance year of the new agreement period. Only low revenue ACOs would be eligible to elect this participation option to remain in Level A for the entirety of their second agreement period under the BASIC track, and we would continue to monitor for revenue status (as well as experience with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives) during the second agreement period. If, during the second agreement period, the ACO began to meet the definition of a high revenue ACO (or an ACO experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives), we proposed that the ACO would be permitted to complete the remainder of its current performance year under Level A, but the ACO would be ineligible to continue participation in Level A after the end of that performance year unless it took corrective action. For example, if the ACO participants' total Medicare Parts A and B FFS revenue increased in relation to total Medicare Parts A and B FFS expenditures for the ACO's assigned beneficiaries, the ACO could remove an ACO participant from its ACO participant list, so that the ACO could continue to meet the definition of low revenue ACO. In the event the ACO did not take steps to maintain its status as a low revenue ACO, we would take compliance action, up to and including termination of the participation agreement, as specified in §§ 425.216 and 425.218, to ensure the ACO did not continue in Level A for subsequent performance years of the agreement period. For example, we would send the ACO a request for a corrective action plan to resolve their change in revenue status, which would allow the ACO time to modify its ACO participant list or PECOS enrollment data such that the ACO could continue to meet the definition of a low revenue ACO. If the ACO continued to meet the definition of a high revenue ACO at the end of the next performance year (that is, based on the ACO's proposed ACO participant list for the following performance year), we proposed that the ACO would be required to move to the level of the BASIC track's glide path in which the ACO would be participating for the following performance year if it had begun the agreement period in the BASIC track's glide path instead of under the one-sided model-only path. This includes meeting the applicable requirements prior to entering performance-based risk, such as establishing an adequate repayment mechanism as specified under § 425.204(f) and selecting an MSR/MLR from the options specified under § 425.605(b). Under this alternative, if an ACO remained either high revenue or experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives based on the ACO's proposed ACO participant list for the following performance year, the ACO would be required to move to Level E, as discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule for monitoring for changes in risk experience.

As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, when the ACO applied for a third agreement period under the BASIC track, we would determine revenue status at the time of application. Only low revenue ACOs that continued to be inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and had entered into a participation agreement under the BASIC track only twice would be eligible to enter the BASIC track glide path. If at time of application CMS determined the ACO was a high revenue ACO as defined under § 425.20 (or if the ACO met the definition of experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives), then it would be required to participate in Level E of the BASIC track (or the ENHANCED track) for the agreement period, rather than entering the BASIC track glide path. If at any time during the ACO's third agreement period CMS determined the ACO had begun to meet the definition of a high revenue ACO (or of an ACO experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives), the ACO would be permitted to complete the remainder of the current performance year under the ACO's current level of the glide path, but would be ineligible to continue participation in the glide path after the end of that performance year and would be moved to Level E of the BASIC track unless the ACO took corrective action to modify its ACO participant list as described above.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the request for comments on the alternative policy of offering new legal entity, low revenue, inexperienced ACOs an additional agreement period in Level A of the BASIC track.

Comment: We received three comments in response to our request for comments on offering new legal entity, low revenue, inexperienced ACOs an additional agreement period in Level A, for a potential total of 12 years in a one-sided model, prior to progressing to performance-based risk. One commenter expressed support, citing experience in risk-sharing arrangements as one of the most critical variables explaining the success of rural ACOs. Another believed that 7 years in the one-sided model is enough and did not believe such an extension was necessary. This commenter also expressed that limiting participation options to only one agreement period entirely in the one-sided model is in the best interest of the Medicare Trust Funds. A third commenter suggested that CMS should consider allowing all inexperienced ACOs—regardless of revenue status—to remain in Level A of the BASIC Track for two full agreement periods.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' input on offering this cohort of ACOs an additional agreement period in Level A, and for their emphasis on providing ACOs with needed flexibility while also protecting the Medicare Trust Funds. At this time, we are not taking further action on this alternative policy discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, but we may consider pursuing this in future rulemaking.

(3) Remove the Limitation on the Number of Agreement Periods an ACO Can Participate in Level E of the BASIC Track

We proposed to make the ENHANCED track optional by adding § 425.600(g)(2) to specify that if an ACO is determined to be experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, the ACO may enter Level E of the BASIC track under § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A)( 5 ) for all performance years of the agreement period, or the ENHANCED track under § 425.600(a)(3). These options would be available without regard to the ACO's status as a high- or low revenue ACO. We also proposed that all ACOs would be permitted to participate indefinitely under the Level E of the BASIC track. This would include ACOs currently in the ENHANCED track or that participate under the ENHANCED track in the future. These ACOs would be permitted to enter a new participation agreement under Level E of the BASIC track. As explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, there are current limitations on how long ACOs may participate in Level E of the BASIC track, and some ACOs have reported that they would rather leave the program than be required to move to the ENHANCED track. We explained that in our implementation of the Shared Savings Program, we intend to achieve larger programmatic goals by encouraging ACO participation and thereby promoting high quality, value-based care for Medicare FFS beneficiaries. We continuously seek to balance creating sufficient incentives for participation in a voluntary program with ensuring that our policies achieve program goals to increase quality of care for Medicare beneficiaries and reduce expenditure growth to protect the Trust Funds. Accordingly, in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we discussed our belief that it would be in the best interest of the program and Medicare FFS beneficiaries to permit eligible ACOs to continue participating under Level E of the BASIC track, rather than risk significant numbers of experienced, successful ACOs terminating their participation in the program instead of progressing to the higher level of risk and potential reward under the ENHANCED track. Our experience shows that ACOs in Level E of the BASIC track and ACOs in the ENHANCED track have similar performance results. We noted that our belief that it is important to offer this option to encourage ACOs that may be ready to take on the higher level of risk and potential reward under the ENHANCED track to progress to that participation option, secure in the knowledge that the more moderate level of risk and potential reward under Level E of the BASIC track would be available to the ACO in the future if the ACO concludes based on experience that that participation option is more appropriate for the ACO than the ENHANCED track. We anticipated providing education and offering outreach to ACOs on the available participation options through various methods available, including ACO Coordinators, guidance documents, tip sheets, FAQs, and a biweekly newsletter to assist ACOs as they navigate to higher levels of risk and potential reward throughout their participation in the program. Table 56 summarizes the proposed participation option policies on which we sought comment.

In conjunction with the proposed changes to the participation options available under the program, we proposed making several technical and conforming changes to the existing regulations. We proposed to modify § 425.600(a)(4)(ii) to reference paragraph § 425.600(g)(2) in addition to the currently identified paragraph (d). We proposed to add § 425.605(b)(2)(ii)(E) to include a provision for an ACO to select its MSR/MLR if it automatically transitions from Level A to Level E of the BASIC track's glide path under the new § 425.600(h)(2). Lastly, we proposed to modify § 425.605(d)(1) and (d)(2) to reference paragraph (g) in addition to the current reference to paragraph (d). We sought comment on these proposals, as well as all proposals in the relevant section of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, and related issues.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposed revisions to remove the limitation on the number of agreement periods an ACO can participate in Level E of the BASIC track and our responses:

Comment: All comments received which included mention of CMS' proposal to allow ACOs to remain in Level E of the BASIC track indefinitely and elect to not move to the ENHANCED track were supportive. Commenters noted that the flexibility provided by the proposal would encourage continued participation in the Shared Savings Program. Commenters mentioned that this change would help ensure the long-term success of the Shared Savings Program as ACOs in Level E would still be assuming substantial levels of risk and contributing greatly to protecting the Trust Funds.

Response: We appreciate the commenters for their support of this proposal.

Comment: Multiple commenters, while supportive of the proposal as written, offered an alternative (if the proposal were not finalized as proposed) for CMS to perform the check for high-revenue ACO status 60 days before the Shared Savings Program application period opens. The stakeholders noted this change would enable existing ACOs that move from low revenue to high revenue status adequate time to apply for the ENHANCED track when the application period opens.

Response: We thank these commenters for their suggestion in the event we did not finalize this policy as proposed. As we are finalizing the policy as proposed, we will not incorporate these suggestions, but may consider them as may be relevant in future rulemaking.

After consideration of the public comments, we are finalizing without modification the new § 425.600(g), and the conforming changes to § 425.600(a)(4)(ii), § 425.605(b)(2)(ii)(E), and § 425.605(d)(1) and (d)(2).

3. Determining Beneficiary Assignment Under the Shared Savings Program

a. Proposed Revisions to the Definition of Primary Care Services Used in Shared Savings Program Beneficiary Assignment

(1) Background

Section 1899(c)(1) of the Act, as amended by the CURES Act and the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, provides that for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2019, the Secretary shall assign beneficiaries to an ACO based on their utilization of primary care services provided by a physician who is an ACO professional and all services furnished by Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs). However, the statute does not specify a list of services considered to be primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67853), we established the initial list of services, identified by Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) and Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) codes, that we considered to be primary care services. In that final rule, we indicated that we intended to monitor CPT and HCPCS codes and would consider making changes to the definition of primary care services to add or delete codes used to identify primary care services, if there were sufficient evidence that revisions were warranted. We have updated the list of primary care service codes in subsequent rulemaking (refer to 80 FR 32746 through 32748; 80 FR 71270 through 71273; 82 FR 53212 and 53213; 83 FR 59964 through 59968; 85 FR 27582 through 27586; 85 FR 84747 through 84756; 85 FR 84785 through 84793; 86 FR 65273 through 65279) to reflect additions or modifications to the codes that have been recognized for payment under the PFS and to incorporate other changes to the definition of primary care services for purposes of the Shared Savings Program.

For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2022, and subsequent performance years, we defined primary care services in § 425.400(c)(1)(vi) for purposes of assigning beneficiaries to ACOs under § 425.402 as the set of services identified by the following HCPCS/CPT codes:

(A) CPT codes:

(1) 96160 and 96161 (codes for administration of health risk assessment).

(2) 99201 through 99215 (codes for office or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of a patient).

(3) 99304 through 99318 (codes for professional services furnished in a nursing facility; professional services or services reported on an FQHC or RHC claim identified by these codes are excluded when furnished in a SNF).

(4) 99319 through 99340 (codes for patient domiciliary, rest home, or custodial care visit).

(5) 99341 through 99350 (codes for evaluation and management services furnished in a patient's home for claims identified by place of service modifier 12).

(6) 99354 and 99355 (add-on codes, for prolonged evaluation and management or psychotherapy services beyond the typical service time of the primary procedure; when the base code is also a primary care service code under this paragraph (c)(1)(vi)).

(7) 99421, 99422, and 99423 (codes for online digital evaluation and management).

(8) 99424, 99425, 99426, and 99427 (codes for principal care management services).

(9) 99437, 99487, 99489, 99490 and 99491 (codes for chronic care management).

(10) 99439 (code for non-complex chronic care management).

(11) 99483 (code for assessment of and care planning for patients with cognitive impairment).

(12) 99484, 99492, 99493 and 99494 (codes for behavioral health integration services).

(13) 99495 and 99496 (codes for transitional care management services).

(14) 99497 and 99498 (codes for advance care planning; services identified by these codes furnished in an inpatient setting are excluded).

(B) HCPCS codes:

(1) G0402 (code for the Welcome to Medicare visit).

(2) G0438 and G0439 (codes for the annual wellness visits).

(3) G0442 (code for alcohol misuse screening service).

(4) G0443 (code for alcohol misuse counseling service).

(5) G0444 (code for annual depression screening service).

(6) G0463 (code for services furnished in ETA hospitals).

(7) G0506 (code for chronic care management).

(8) G2010 (code for the remote evaluation of patient video/images).

(9) G2012 and G2252 (codes for virtual check-in).

(10) G2058 (code for non-complex chronic care management).

(11) G2064 and G2065 (codes for principal care management services).

(12) G2212 (code for prolonged office or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of a patient).

(13) G2214 (code for psychiatric collaborative care model).

(C) Primary care service codes include any CPT code identified by CMS that directly replaces a CPT code specified in paragraph (c)(1)(vi)(A) of this section or a HCPCS code specified in paragraph (c)(1)(vi)(B) of this section, when the assignment window (as defined in § 425.20) for a benchmark or performance year includes any day on or after the effective date of the replacement code for payment purposes under FFS Medicare.

(2) Revisions

(a) HCPCS and CPT Codes Used in Assignment

Based on feedback from ACOs and our further review of the HCPCS and CPT codes that are currently recognized for payment under the PFS or that we proposed to recognize for payment starting in CY 2023, we discussed in the proposed rule our belief that it would be appropriate to amend the definition of primary care services used in the Shared Savings Program assignment methodology to include certain additional codes and to make other technical changes to the definition of primary care services for use in determining beneficiary assignment for the performance year starting on January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years in order to remain consistent with billing and coding guidance under the PFS.

We proposed to revise the definition of primary care services used for assignment in the Shared Savings Program regulations to include the following additions: (1) Prolonged services HCPCS codes GXXX2 and GXXX3, if finalized; and (2) Chronic Pain Management HCPCS codes GYYY1 and GYYY2, if finalized. The following provides additional information about the HCPCS codes that we proposed to add to the definition of primary care services used in assignment:

• Prolonged Services Codes GXXX2 and GXXX3: In section II.F of the proposed rule, we proposed that prolonged nursing facility services furnished by a physician or non-physician practitioner (NPP) would be reportable under GXXX2, which would be used when the total time for the primary service is exceeded by 15 or more minutes to account for the additional time spent. The long descriptor would be GXXX2 ( Prolonged nursing facility evaluation and management service(s) beyond the total time for the primary service (when the primary service has been selected using time on the date of the primary service); each additional 15 minutes by the physician or qualified healthcare professional, with or without direct patient contact (list separately in addition to CPT codes 99306, 99310 for nursing facility evaluation and management services). (Do not report GXXX2 on the same date of service as other prolonged services for evaluation and management 99358, 99359, 993X0). (Do not report GXXX2 for any time unit less than 15 minutes )). Prolonged physician or NPP nursing facility (NF) services would be reportable once 95 minutes are spent for initial NF visits, and once 85 minutes are spent for subsequent NF visits, and for each additional 15 minutes furnished thereafter. Because GXXX2 would be reportable for each additional 15-minute increment of time beyond the total time for CPT codes 99306 and 99310, which are included in the Shared Savings Program definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we noted our belief that GXXX2 should also be included in the definition of primary care services under § 425.400(c) for the performance year starting on January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years, if payment for the code is made permanent through the CY 2023 PFS rulemaking, since this code would represent the provision of services that are already included in the definition of primary care services for a longer period of time.

Additionally, we proposed that prolonged home or residence services by a physician or NPP would be reportable under GXXX3 ( Prolonged home or residence evaluation and management service(s) beyond the total time for the primary service (when the primary service has been selected using time on the date of the primary service); each additional 15 minutes by the physician or qualified healthcare professional, with or without direct patient contact (list separately in addition to CPT codes 99345, 99350 for home or residence evaluation and management services). (Do not report GXXX3 on the same date of service as other prolonged services for evaluation and management 99358, 99359, 99417). (Do not report GXXX3 for any time unit less than 15 minutes )). Because code GXXX3 would be reportable as an add-on code to CPT codes 99345 or 99350 once the practitioner spends 15+ minutes beyond the total time finalized for the primary service, and CPT codes 99345 and 99350 are included in the Shared Savings Program definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we expressed our belief that GXXX3 should also be included in the definition of primary care services under § 425.400(c) for the performance year starting on January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years, if payment for the code is made permanent through the CY 2023 PFS rulemaking, since this code would represent the provision of services that are already included in the definition of primary care services for a longer period of time.

• Chronic Pain Management (CPM) HCPCS codes GYYY1 and GYYY2: In section II.E of the proposed rule, we proposed two new HCPCS codes for CPM services, beginning January 1, 2023. We recognized that there is no existing code that specifically describes the work of the clinician involved in performing the tasks necessary to perform holistic, CPM under current Medicare payment policy. These new HCPCS codes would be analogous to Chronic Care Management (CCM) services and Principal Care Management (PCM) services because GYYY1 would include similar care plan, medication management, unusually complex clinical management; care coordination between relevant practitioners furnishing care; and time for care provided personally by a physician or other qualified health care professional, as described in CPT code 99424; and GYYY2 would include similar activities as described in CPT code 99425, both of which already are included in the Shared Savings Program definition of primary care services used in assignment. Additionally, we discussed in the proposed rule our expectation that most of these services would be billed by primary care practitioners who are focused on long-term management of their patients with chronic pain and we expect the billing practitioner to demonstrate in the Medicare patient's record when there is coordination or continuity of care between a specialist or other relevant practitioner, such as a physical therapist or occupational therapist, which, we indicated, supports the inclusion of the services described by these HCPCS codes in our definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment under the Shared Savings Program. Under the Shared Savings Program, CCM services reported using CPT codes 99437, 99439, 99487, 99489, 99490 and 99491 and HCPCS code G2058 and PCM services reported using CPT Codes 99424, 99425, 99426, and 99427 and HCPCS codes G2064 and G2065 currently are included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment (refer to 85 FR 84749 and 86 FR 65274 through 65275) and as such, to remain consistent with updates to the scope of care management services payable under the PFS, we proposed to include these CPM services codes, if finalized, in the definition of primary care services used for beneficiary assignment. Accordingly, we proposed to include HCPCS code GYYY1 ( Chronic pain management and treatment, monthly bundle including, diagnosis; assessment and monitoring; administration of a validated pain rating scale or tool; the development, implementation, revision, and maintenance of a person-centered care plan that includes strengths, goals, clinical needs, and desired outcomes; overall treatment management; facilitation and coordination of any necessary behavioral health treatment; medication management; pain and health literacy counseling; any necessary chronic pain related crisis care; and ongoing communication and care coordination between relevant practitioners furnishing care, e.g., physical therapy and occupational therapy, and community-based care, as appropriate. Required initial face-to-face visit at least 30 minutes provided by a physician or other qualified health professional; first 30 minutes personally provided by physician or other qualified health care professional, per calendar month. (When using GYYY1 30 minutes must be met or exceeded.)) and GYYY2 ( Each additional 15 minutes of chronic pain management and treatment by a physician or other qualified health care professional, per calendar month (List separately in addition to code for GYYY1). When using GYYY2 15 minutes must be met or exceeded.) because GYYY2 is similar in scope as GYYY1, just for additional duration, in the definition of primary care services under § 425.400(c) for the performance year starting on January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years, if payment for these codes is made permanent through the CY 2023 PFS rulemaking.

(b) Technical Update to the Description of CPT Codes 99341 Through 99350

In the CY 2019 PFS final rule (83 FR 60093), we updated our regulations at § 400(c)(1)(iv)(A)( 4 ) by adding the descriptor “codes for evaluation and management services furnished in a patients' [sic] home for claims identified by place of service modifier 12” to CPT codes 99341 through 99350, as used in the definition of primary care services used in assignment for performance years (or a performance period) starting during 2019 and PY 2020. This descriptor, slightly modified to correct a typographical error, also applied for the performance year starting on January 1, 2021, under § 425.400(c)(1)(v)(A)( 5 ) and continues to apply for the performance year starting on January 1, 2022, and subsequent performance years, under § 425.400(c)(1)(vi)(A)( 5 ).

On March 17, 2021, the AMA updated the CPT® Editorial summary of Panel Actions for February 2021 ( https://www.ama-assn.org/system/files/2021-03/february-2021-summary-panel-actions.pdf ). This summary describes revisions made to Home and Residence Services to revise the guidelines for CPT codes 99341 through 99350 to include services provided in assisted living facilities, group homes, custodial care facilities, and residential substance use treatment facilities. As discussed in section II.C of the proposed rule, we proposed to adopt these changes under Medicare FFS payment policies and as such, we proposed conforming changes to omit the reference to “for claims identified by place of service modifier 12” from the description for CPT codes 99341 through 99350. We proposed that the modification would be reflected in the definition of primary care services used in assignment for the performance year starting on January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years at § 425.400(c)(1)(vii)(A)( 5 ).

As proposed, CPT codes 99341 through 99350 would be described as codes for evaluation and management services furnished in a patient's home, without the place of service 12 identifier. The place of service logic is included in claims processing algorithms, and therefore, accounted for in paid claims used by the Shared Savings Program in determining beneficiary assignment. As described in Medicare Claims Processing Manual, Publication 100-04, Chapter 26, place of service codes are two-digit codes placed on health care professional claims to indicate the setting in which a service was provided. Claims submitted for services that are allowable when provided in certain settings will process only when the appropriate place of service is included on the claim. Place of service 12 is defined as “location, other than a hospital or other facility, where the patient receives care in a private residence.” In previous rulemaking, we updated the reference to CPT codes 99341 through 99350 in the definition of primary care services at § 425.400(c) to include place of service 12 for clarity; however, as discussed in the proposed rule, we now believe it is no longer accurate as these codes have been revised to include multiple places of service, any of which we would consider to be the patient's home.

(c) Rural Emergency Hospitals

The Consolidated Appropriations Act (CAA) of 2021, was signed into law on December 27, 2020. In this legislation, Congress established a new rural Medicare provider type: Rural Emergency Hospitals (REHs). These providers will furnish emergency department and observation care, and other specified outpatient medical and health services, if elected by the REH, that do not exceed an annual per patient average of 24 hours. Hospitals that were CAHs or rural hospitals with not more than 50 beds, participating in Medicare, as of the date of enactment of the CAA, are eligible to seek conversion to an REH. REHs are expected to help address the barriers in access to health care, particularly emergency services and other outpatient services that result from rural hospital closures, and by doing so, may help address observed inequities in health care in rural areas. Section 1861(kkk)(1)(A) of the Act defines the term “REH services” as emergency department and observation services, as well as other medical and health services furnished on an outpatient basis as specified by the Secretary.

Under section 1861(k)(10) of the Act, payments will be made for REH services furnished on or after January 1, 2023. We expect that REHs will submit claims in a similar manner to hospital outpatient departments paid under the OPPS. As a result, we explained in the proposed rule our belief that we did not need to propose special policies regarding the treatment of services furnished in REHs for purposes of beneficiary assignment under the Shared Savings Program. Rather, we would consider services furnished in REHs in the same manner that we currently consider services furnished in hospital outpatient departments for purposes of conducting assignment under the Shared Savings Program. However, we noted that we would continue to monitor the development of payment policy for REHs to determine whether any adjustments to our assignment policies may be necessary to account for services furnished in REHs and would consider whether any findings may warrant changes through future notice and comment rulemaking. In addition, we noted that in section III.G.3.b. of the proposed rule, we proposed to include on an ACO's ACO provider/supplier list any CCNs that may be deactivated and then reactivated, or disenrolled as one facility type but re-enrolled as another facility type, which would include any CAHs that elect to re-enroll as rural emergency hospitals.

We proposed to specify a revised definition of primary care services in a new provision of the Shared Savings Program regulations at § 425.400(c)(1)(vii) to include the list of HCPCS and CPT codes specified in § 25.400(c)(1)(vi) along with the proposed additional HCPCS codes GXXX2 and GXXX3, and GYYY1 and GYYY2, if these additional codes were finalized through the CY 2023 PFS rulemaking. We further proposed to omit from the description for CPT codes 99341 through 99350, the reference to “for claims identified by place of service modifier 12.” We proposed that the new provision at § 425.400(c)(1)(vii) would be applicable for use in determining beneficiary assignment for the performance year starting on January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years. Further, we proposed technical modifications to the introductory text in § 425.400(c)(1)(vi) to limit the applicability of this provision to the performance year starting on January 1, 2022.

We sought comment on the proposed changes to the definition of primary care services used for assigning beneficiaries to Shared Savings Program ACOs for the performance year starting on January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years. We also welcomed comments on any other existing HCPCS or CPT codes and proposed HCPCS or CPT codes, that we should consider adding to the definition of primary care services for purposes of assignment in future rulemaking.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposed revisions to the HCPCS and CPT codes used in assignment and our responses:

Comment: Many commenters supported the inclusion of the CPM HCPCS codes GXXX2 and GXXX3 and new prolonged services codes GYYY1 and GYYY2 in the definition of primary care services used in assignment. Some commenters agreed with our statement that the new prolonged services HCPCS codes reflect the provision of services beyond the total time for codes currently included in the Shared Savings Program definition of primary care services used in assignment. An additional commenter stated their belief that these additional beneficiary assignment codes will positively impact beneficiary assignment for ACOs providing care to the most serious and chronically ill patients.

A couple of commenters did not support the addition of chronic pain management codes, suggesting that the management of chronic pain does “not routinely follow the overall health of the patient; it is often managed by a very specialized set of skills that are focused on treating a specific condition” and that chronic pain seems to fall outside the definition of “primary care services” as intended in the original design of the model. Another commenter stated that they oppose inclusion of the proposed codes due to unspecified potential unintended consequences that could result in assignment of beneficiaries to ACOs based on care that is provided outside of the ACO's control.

A couple of commenters recommended that CMS monitor the utilization of both the CPM and prolonged services codes to ensure that they are being furnished as primary care services. One of these commenters supported the inclusion of the codes with monitoring to ensure that they adequately reflect beneficiaries' receipt of primary care services, while the other did not support the use of the codes until after monitoring for the same. The commenters stated that if the codes are primarily being billed by non-primary care physicians, it would not be appropriate to use them in assignment.

Response: We agree with commenters who stated that our proposal to revise the definition of primary care services used for assignment will positively impact beneficiary assignment for ACOs providing care to the most serious and chronically ill patients. While the commenters did not provide additional rationale for how beneficiary assignment would be positively impacted, we interpret this comment to mean that beneficiary assignment would be more inclusive of serious and chronically ill patients which could increase assigned beneficiaries for certain ACOs. We further agree, as explained earlier in this section of this final rule, that CPM services are analogous to CCM and PCM services already included in the definition of primary care services used in assignment, and that the new prolonged services HCPCS codes reflect the provision of services beyond the total time for codes currently included in the Shared Savings Program definition of primary care services used in assignment.

We acknowledge the commenters that opposed or expressed concerns about the inclusion of these HCPCS codes in the definition of primary care services used in assignment and recognize that these are newly developed codes without historical utilization patterns. As described in our proposal, we expect that most of these services would be billed by primary care practitioners who are focused on long-term management of their patients with chronic pain. Commenters were not specific in discussing unintended consequences that could occur, should these services be added to the definition of primary care services used in beneficiary assignment, so we are not persuaded by these comments.

Additionally, we continue to believe that CPM services are analogous to PCM and CCM services which are already included in the definition of primary care services used for beneficiary assignment, and we are not persuaded by commenters' feedback that chronic pain falls outside a reasonable definition of “primary care services” for purposes of beneficiary assignment in the Shared Savings Program. In section II.F of this final rule, which finalizes the payment policies for the new CPM codes, we reiterate our belief that most CPM services would be billed by primary care practitioners who are focused on long-term management of their patients with chronic pain. As calls for improved pain management have increased in recent years, this has resulted in better education and training of primary care practitioners and heightened awareness of the need for pain care nationally. We believe the codes being finalized for CPM services will create appropriate payment for physicians and other practitioners (including but not limited to primary care practitioners) that reflects the time and resources involved in attending comprehensively to the needs of beneficiaries with chronic pain.

As a “pre-step” in the claims-based assignment process, CMS identifies all beneficiaries who had at least one primary care service with a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO and who is a primary care physician as defined under § 425.20 or who has one of the primary specialty designations specified in § 425.402(c). Under claims-based assignment, CMS assigns beneficiaries to ACOs through either one of two steps. Under Step 1, CMS assigns a beneficiary to a Shared Savings Program ACO when the beneficiary receives more primary care services (measured by Medicare-allowed charges) furnished by primary care physicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants and clinical nurse specialists in the participating ACO than from the same type of providers at any other Shared Savings Program ACO, non-ACO CCN, or non-ACO individual or group TIN. Step 2 only applies to assignable beneficiaries who have not had a primary care service rendered by any primary care physician, nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or clinical nurse specialist, either inside the ACO or outside the ACO and were therefore not assigned in assignment Step 1. CMS assigns a beneficiary to a Shared Savings Program ACO in this step when the beneficiary receives more primary care services (measured by Medicare-allowed charges) furnished by physicians who are ACO professionals with specialty designations as specified in § 425.402(c) in the participating ACO than from the same type of providers at any other Shared Savings Program ACO, non-ACO CCN, or non-ACO individual or group TIN. We expect that the assignment algorithm will ensure appropriate assignment to an ACO when using these CPM and prolonged services HCPCS codes and we will monitor the billing and utilization of these codes to ensure that their inclusion in the definition of primary care services used for beneficiary assignment is appropriate, including by monitoring and evaluating place of service and provider specialty associated with billed claims for these CPM and prolonged services HCPCS codes. If monitoring shows that the inclusion of these services in the definition of primary care services used for beneficiary assignment is not appropriate, we will address that concern in future notice and comment rulemaking.

Comment: A few comments provided general support of our proposal to make conforming changes to omit the reference to “for claims identified by place of service modifier 12” from the description for CPT codes 99341 through 99350. One commenter indicated strong support because these coding changes will help bring transparency to the services provided in those settings. These commenters believe that under current coding and billing conventions, “home” services are all lumped together and thus difficult to untangle and analyze productively.

Response: We agree that our proposal to adopt technical updates to the Shared Savings Program beneficiary assignment regulations is important for determining where patients receive most of their primary care while also ensuring that the definition of primary care services used for purposes of assignment remains in alignment with HCPCS/CPT coding changes made under the PFS. As discussed in Section II.C of this final rule, for CY 2023, the home and domiciliary E/M code family will be revised by the CPT to include services provided in assisted living facilities, group homes, custodial care facilities, and residential substance abuse treatment facilities, as well as a patient's home. These changes include combining the domiciliary and rest home CPT codes with the home visit CPT codes, resulting in a single family of CPT codes that describe these types of services.

In consideration of the public comments, we are finalizing as proposed a revised definition of primary care services in a new provision of the Shared Savings Program regulations at § 425.400(c)(1)(vii) to include the list of HCPCS and CPT codes specified in § 425.400(c)(1)(vi) along with the following additions: (1) Prolonged services HCPCS codes GXXX2 and GXXX3, which are being finalized as G0317 ((Prolonged nursing facility evaluation and management service(s) beyond the total time for the primary service (when the primary service has been selected using time on the date of the primary service); each additional 15 minutes by the physician or qualified healthcare professional, with or without direct patient contact (list separately in addition to CPT codes 99306, 99310 for nursing facility evaluation and management services). (Do not report G0317 on the same date of service as other prolonged services for evaluation and management 99358, 99359, 993X0). (Do not report G0317 for any time unit less than 15 minutes)) and G0318 ((Prolonged home or residence evaluation and management service(s) beyond the total time for the primary service (when the primary service has been selected using time on the date of the primary service); each additional 15 minutes by the physician or qualified healthcare professional, with or without direct patient contact (list separately in addition to CPT codes 99345, 99350 for home or residence evaluation and management services). (Do not report G0318 on the same date of service as other prolonged services for evaluation and management 99358, 99359, 99417). (Do not report G0318 for any time unit less than 15 minutes)), respectively, as discussed in section II.F of this final rule; and (2) Chronic Pain Management HCPCS codes GYYY1 and GYYY2, which are being finalized with modifications to the descriptions as discussed in section II.E of this final rule as G3002 ( Chronic pain management and treatment, monthly bundle including, diagnosis; assessment and monitoring; administration of a validated pain rating scale or tool; the development, implementation, revision, and/or maintenance of a person-centered care plan that includes strengths, goals, clinical needs, and desired outcomes; overall treatment management; facilitation and coordination of any necessary behavioral health treatment; medication management; pain and health literacy counseling; any necessary chronic pain related crisis care; and ongoing communication and care coordination between relevant practitioners furnishing care (e.g., physical therapy and occupational therapy, and complementary and integrative approaches, and community-based care), as appropriate. Required initial face-to-face visit at least 30 minutes provided by a physician or other qualified health professional; first 30 minutes personally provided by physician or other qualified health care professional, per calendar month. (When using G3002, 30 minutes must be met or exceeded.)) and G3003 ( Each additional 15 minutes of chronic pain management and treatment by a physician or other qualified health care professional, per calendar month (List separately in addition to code for G3002). (When using G3003, 15 minutes must be met or exceeded.)), respectively.

We are also finalizing as proposed the conforming changes to omit the reference to “for claims identified by place of service modifier 12” from the description for CPT codes 99341 through 99350.

We are additionally finalizing as proposed that the new provision at § 425.400(c)(1)(vii) would be applicable for use in determining beneficiary assignment for the performance year starting on January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years. Further, we are finalizing as proposed technical modifications to the introductory text in § 425.400(c)(1)(vi) to limit the applicability of this previous provision to the performance year starting on January 1, 2022.

We did not receive any feedback on the discussion of how REHs would be treated for purposes of beneficiary assignment. We affirm that we will continue to monitor the development of payment policy for REHs to determine whether any adjustments to our assignment policies may be necessary to account for services furnished in REHs and will consider whether any findings may warrant changes through future notice and comment rulemaking.

b. Identifying How CMS Certification Numbers Will Be Included and Used in Beneficiary Assignment

(1) Background

Under the Shared Savings Program, ACOs are accountable for the quality, cost, and overall care of the Medicare FFS beneficiaries that are assigned to the ACO (§ 425.100(a)). ACOs are formed by one or more “ACO participants,” which are responsible for managing and coordinating care for the assigned beneficiary population. The Shared Savings Program regulations define “ACO participant” at § 425.20 as an entity identified by a Medicare-enrolled billing Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) through which one or more “ACO providers/suppliers” bill Medicare, that alone or together with one or more other ACO participants compose an ACO, and that is included on the list of ACO participants that is required under § 425.118 (herein “ACO participant list”). An “ACO provider/supplier” is an individual or entity that: (1) is a provider (as defined at § 400.202) or supplier (as defined at § 400.202); (2) is enrolled in Medicare; (3) bills for items and services furnished to Medicare FFS beneficiaries during the agreement period under a Medicare billing number assigned to the TIN of an ACO participant in accordance with applicable Medicare regulations; and (4) is included on the list of ACO providers/suppliers that is required under § 425.118 (herein “ACO provider/supplier list”). CMS requires each ACO to execute contractual agreements with each of its ACO participants (“ACO participant agreements”), to ensure that the ACO participant and each ACO provider/supplier billing through the TIN of the ACO participant agree to the requirements of the Shared Savings Program.

Under § 425.118(a), an ACO must maintain, update, and submit to CMS an accurate and complete list identifying each ACO participant (including its Medicare-enrolled TIN) and each ACO provider/supplier (including its National Provider Identifier (NPI), CCN, or other identifier). All Medicare-enrolled individuals and entities that have reassigned their right to receive Medicare payment to the TIN of an ACO participant must be included on the ACO provider/supplier list (§ 425.118(a)(4)).

(a) Development and Maintenance of the ACO Participant List

An ACO must submit a draft ACO participant list before the start of an agreement period and before each performance year thereafter. CMS reviews the draft list, conducts a program integrity screening on the individuals and entities identified on the list, approves or rejects each entry on the list, and informs the ACO of the contents of the resulting ACO participant list. In accordance with § 425.118(a)(3), the ACO must certify the accuracy of its ACO participant list before the start of its agreement period and before each performance year thereafter.

An ACO must maintain and periodically update its ACO participant list. An ACO is required to notify CMS no later than 30 days after an entity ceases to be an ACO participant. The entity is deleted from the ACO participant list as of the termination date of the entity's ACO participant agreement. Absent unusual circumstances, the ACO participant's data will continue to be utilized for certain operational purposes. CMS does not make adjustments during the performance year to the ACO's assignment, historical benchmark, performance year financial calculations, or the obligation of the ACO to report on behalf of eligible clinicians who bill under the TIN of an ACO participant for certain CMS quality initiatives, to reflect the deletion of entities from the ACO participant list that become effective during the performance year.

If the ACO wishes to add an entity to its ACO participant list, it must submit a request to CMS. If CMS approves the request, the addition becomes effective on January 1 of the next performance year. ACO participants may not be added during a performance year.

The ACO participant list is critical to Shared Savings Program operations. CMS uses the ACO participant list to identify which entities are in the ACO, generate the ACO provider/supplier list, determine which Medicare FFS beneficiaries will be assigned to an ACO, establish the historical benchmark, perform financial calculations, and coordinate among CMS quality reporting initiatives.

(b) Development and Maintenance of the ACO Provider/Supplier List

In accordance with § 425.118, ACOs must submit to CMS before the start of an agreement period and before each performance year thereafter an accurate and complete list identifying each ACO provider/supplier (including its NPI, CCN, or other identifier). In accordance with § 425.118(a)(3), the ACO must certify the accuracy of its ACO provider/supplier list. In addition, ACOs are required to notify CMS of any changes in their ACO provider/supplier list in accordance with § 425.118(c). Specifically, an ACO must notify CMS within 30 days after an individual or entity becomes or ceases to be a Medicare-enrolled provider or supplier that bills for items and services it furnishes to Medicare FFS beneficiaries under a billing number assigned to the TIN of an ACO participant (§ 425.118(c)).

For performance years starting on January 1, 2019, and subsequent performance years, CMS creates the initial ACO provider/supplier list for a performance year by using the Provider Enrollment, Chain, and Ownership System (PECOS) to identify by CCN and NPI all of the providers and suppliers, respectively, that have reassigned their right to receive Medicare payment to the TIN of an ACO participant. As with its ACO participant list, each ACO must review that initial list, make any necessary corrections, and certify the resulting ACO provider/supplier list prior to the start of a performance year and at such other times as specified by CMS.

(c) Use of Lists in Beneficiary Assignment

For PYs 2012 through 2018, ACOs were required to identify on their ACO participant list the CCNs for certain provider types (FQHCs, RHCs, Electing Teaching Amendment (ETA) hospitals, and Method II Critical Access Hospitals (CAHs)), as well as the ACO participant TIN under which the CCN was enrolled in Medicare. CMS required ACOs to identify CCNs and their associated TIN information because otherwise it would not be possible to identify the institutional claims billed by those providers for purposes of beneficiary assignment since TINs are not retained in the CMS Integrated Data Repository (IDR) for the claims submitted by FQHCs, RHCs, ETA hospitals, and Method II CAHs.

Additionally, ACOs that included FQHCs and/or RHCs on their ACO participant list were also required to identify, through an attestation, a list of physicians who directly provided primary care services in each FQHC or RHC (herein “attestation list”) in accordance with § 425.404(a). The linkage of the physicians to the FQHCs and RHCs provided via the attestation list was necessary because physicians and other individual practitioners cannot reassign their Medicare billing rights to an FQHC or RHC CCN. Therefore, although FQHCs, RHCs, physicians, and other individual practitioners are all listed in PECOS, the PECOS reassignment data used to generate the ACO provider/supplier list could not have linked the NPI of a physician or other practitioner to the CCN of an FQHC or RHC and, in turn, to an ACO participant TIN. This attestation list was collected through the ACO's application to the Shared Savings Program and could be updated annually with changes, if any, which would take effect January 1 of the next performance year.

In accordance with § 425.404(b), for performance years starting on January 1, 2019, and subsequent years, under the assignment methodology in § 425.402, CMS treats a service reported on an FQHC/RHC claim, identified using the CCN as a unique identifier for an individual FQHC/RHC, as a primary care service performed by a primary care physician. For performance years starting on January 1, 2019, and subsequent performance years, CMS uses PECOS to identify the CCN or NPI of each ACO provider/supplier enrolled under an ACO participant TIN. Specifically, CMS uses PECOS data to identify the following: (i) all Medicare enrolled entities (as identified by a CCN) that have enrolled under the TIN of an ACO participant; and (ii) all individual practitioners (as identified by an NPI) who have reassigned their right to receive Medicare payment to the TIN of an ACO participant. The resulting initial ACO provider/supplier list reflects PECOS enrollment information at a single point in time. An ACO may need to add or remove a provider or supplier who has reassigned his or her right to receive Medicare payment to the TIN of an ACO participant after the ACO certified its ACO provider/supplier list for the performance year. An ACO that needs to make a change to its certified ACO provider/supplier list must notify CMS within 30 days of the change.

For purposes of beneficiary assignment, we identify claims for services furnished by Method II CAHs, ETA hospitals, FQHCs, and RHCs using the CCN assigned to the facility. In general, ACO participants are identified by TINs. However, the TINs for Method II CAHs, FQHCs, RHCs, and ETA hospitals are not included in the National Claims History and IDR claims files, so we use the CCN as the unique identifier to identify services furnished by these entities. Thus, for these providers, we use TINs from the certified ACO participant list and the associated CCNs sourced from PECOS as the basis for beneficiary assignment. We also use claims from participant TINs on the certified ACO participant list and the CCNs from the initial ACO provider/supplier list in the determination of whether an ACO is a high revenue ACO or low revenue ACO, as defined at § 425.20, and in the determination of beneficiary assignment upon which benchmark and performance year expenditure calculations are determined.

This approach allows CMS to identify ACO participant TINs and associated CCNs for the downstream operations necessary to prepare for the start of the performance year on January 1, including producing the ACO's list of prospectively assigned or preliminarily prospectively assigned beneficiaries, as applicable, at the start of each performance year.

Although the CCNs enrolled under a TIN may change during the course of an ACO's performance year, CMS' current operational process identifies any related CCN changes, through use of PECOS, only during the application process or the annual change request cycle. As with the certified ACO participant list, the CCNs used for purposes of beneficiary assignment and other operations are those that appear on the initial ACO provider/supplier list that is developed before the start of a performance year, and those CCNs remain applicable for the duration of the performance year. Any new CCNs that are established during a performance year are not used for purposes of beneficiary assignment and other operations until the start of the next performance year. The same applies to CCNs that become deactivated or change their TIN affiliation (that is, enroll under a different TIN) in PECOS during a performance year; those changes are not reflected in beneficiary assignment and other operations until the start of the next performance year. In PECOS, a “deactivated” enrollment status includes providers or suppliers whose Medicare billing privileges have been deactivated under § 424.540, as well as providers and suppliers that have voluntarily terminated their enrollment.

(2) Revisions

As discussed in the proposed rule, in order to administer the Shared Savings Program, we need to accurately identify all ACO participant TINs and ACO providers/suppliers that participate in the program. An accurate identification of the ACO participants and the CCNs that are ACO providers/suppliers in an ACO is critical for assignment of beneficiaries to the ACO, as well as for assessing the quality of care provided by the ACO to its assigned beneficiaries. An accurate identification of the individuals and entities participating in the ACO is also critical for ensuring compliance with program rules and equally important for the ACO and its own operational and compliance purposes. Thus, both CMS and the ACO need to have a common understanding of the individuals and entities that compose the ACO. We obtain this common understanding by requiring per § 425.118 that the ACO certify the accuracy of its ACO participant and ACO provider/supplier lists prior to the start of each performance year. In addition, we require the ACO to notify CMS of any changes to its ACO participant list and ACO provider/supplier list throughout the performance year. Because we rely on these lists for operational purposes, we must have a transparent process that results in the accurate identification of all ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers, including CCNs, that compose each ACO in the Shared Savings Program.

Based on our operational experience, we have determined that our current process, wherein we use an ACO's certified ACO participant list and data from PECOS to generate the initial ACO provider/supplier list prior to the start of the performance year and to identify the CCNs used for purposes of beneficiary assignment and other operations, may not capture all changes to providers and suppliers that participate in an ACO during the performance year. Specifically, our current processes do not capture: (a) new CCNs that are enrolled in Medicare under ACO participant TINs after the initial ACO provider/supplier list for a performance year is generated; or (b) CCNs that are in a deactivated status as listed in PECOS at the time the initial ACO provider/supplier list for a performance year is generated.

A CCN enrollment can become active or be deactivated in PECOS at any time, and a CCN can change TIN affiliations over time, including during the course of an ACO's performance year. Developing the initial ACO provider/supplier list, including the CCNs used for purposes of beneficiary assignment and other operations, before the start of a new performance year, and having that list remain applicable for the duration of the performance year, prevents us from later capturing during the performance year any newly-enrolled CCNs affiliated with ACO participant TINs.

Not recognizing new CCNs that enroll under an ACO participant TIN after the initial ACO provider/supplier list is generated impacts the determination of beneficiary assignment, expenditure and revenue calculations, and coordination among CMS quality reporting initiatives. Analysis based on PY 2019, 2019A, 2020, and 2021 data has shown that considering only the CCNs on the ACO provider/supplier list that is established prior to the start of the performance year, has a significant impact on assignment for some ACOs that include FQHCs, RHCs, ETA hospitals, and Method II CAHs. We found that 555 CCNs newly enrolled or re-enrolled during the course of PY 2020. CCNs were added across 143 (28 percent) of the 517 participating ACOs. Among the 344 ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, 96 ACOs (28 percent) would have been impacted if the newly-enrolled CCNs were added to the ACO's ACO provider/supplier list during the 2020 performance year. An estimated 42,000 additional beneficiaries could have been assigned based on primary care services provided by CCNs enrolled during the performance year. Over 80 percent (that is, approximately 28,000) of these additional beneficiaries would have been concentrated among 12 ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation.

Accordingly, we proposed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule to add a new provision at § 425.402(f) to reflect how CCNs are used in assignment. As proposed § 425.402(f)(1), prior to the start of the performance year and periodically during the performance year, CMS would determine the CCNs for all FQHCs, RHCs, Method II CAHs, and ETA hospitals enrolled under the TIN of an ACO participant, including all CCNs with an active enrollment in Medicare and all CCNs with a deactivated enrollment status. Under proposed § 425.402(f)(2), we would use those CCNs in determining assignment for the performance year.

Under proposed § 425.402(f)(3), we set forth how we would account for changes in CCN enrollment status during a performance year. Under the proposal, CCNs that enroll under an ACO participant TIN during the performance year would be reflected in program operations, including but not limited to: beneficiary assignment and revenue and expenditure calculations performed quarterly and during financial reconciliation for ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. Specifically, if a new CCN with no prior Medicare claims experience enrolls under the TIN of an ACO participant after the ACO certifies its ACO participant list for a performance year as required under § 425.118(a)(3), we would consider services furnished by that CCN in determining assignment to the ACO for the applicable performance year if the ACO has selected preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. As discussed in the proposed rule, we believe it would be important to limit these updates to newly-enrolled CCNs during the performance year in order to ensure equivalency between historical benchmark expenditures and performance year expenditures. We proposed to codify this change in the regulations at § 425.402(f)(3)(i).

We further proposed that services furnished by a CCN with a deactivated enrollment status prior to that CCN becoming deactivated that is enrolled under the TIN of an ACO participant at the start of a performance year will be considered in determining beneficiary assignment to the ACO for the applicable performance year or benchmark year. For purposes of this policy, we noted that we would use PECOS data to determine whether a CCN has a deactivated enrollment status. In the case of a CCN with a deactivated enrollment status that had multiple TIN affiliations prior to its deactivation, we proposed to use the TIN with which the CCN was most recently enrolled to identify the appropriate ACO participant, if any, to which services furnished by the CCN should be attributed. We believe that the inclusion of CCNs with a deactivated enrollment status in PECOS is consistent with our policy on the consideration of claims billed by merged/acquired TINs as discussed in the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32715). We noted in the proposed rule that we believe that our rationale for the merged/acquired TIN policy also applies to CCNs with a deactivated enrollment status—namely, that (a) it is likely that the physicians and other practitioners furnishing primary care services billed via the CCN will continue to serve the same patient population that they served before the CCN deactivated its enrollment and (b) their patients may appear on the ACO's list of assigned beneficiaries at the end of the performance year. We discussed that we believe the proposed change would be important to maintain accuracy and comparability with regard to historical benchmark and performance year expenditure calculations. We proposed to codify this change in the regulations at § 425.402(f)(3)(ii).

The policy under proposed § 425.402(f)(3)(ii) would apply to CCNs that are deactivated but later reactivated, or that are disenrolled as one facility type but later re-enrolled as another type of ACO provider/supplier. For example, if a CCN for a Method II CAH was deactivated during PY 2022 and later re-enrolled as another facility type during PY2023, the services furnished by the deactivated CCN would be considered in determining the ACO's assigned beneficiary population and historical benchmark expenditures for PY 2023, which is not the case under current policy. Similarly, if a CCN for a Method II CAH was deactivated during PY 2022 and later re-enrolled as an REH with a new CCN in CY 2023, the services furnished by the deactivated CCN would be considered in determining the ACO's assigned beneficiary population and historical benchmark expenditures for PY 2023, which is not the case under current policy. By considering both the deactivated CCN and the new REH CCN in determining the ACO's assigned beneficiary population, we would ensure parity between historical benchmark expenditures and performance year expenditures.

We noted in the proposed rule that while we proposed a specific policy to include deactivated CCNs in assignment, a similar policy is not needed for deactivated NPIs. During the performance and benchmark years, deactivated NPIs are included in assignment by default if they are included on a claim during the applicable assignment window.

As discussed in the proposed rule, we believe it is necessary to continue our current operational process, to not allow CCNs to switch between ACOs during the performance year. That is, if a CCN that was enrolled under the TIN of one ACO participant enrolls under a different TIN during a performance year, we would continue to treat services billed by the CCN as services furnished by the original ACO participant TIN under which the CCN was enrolled. We believe it is most appropriate to continue our current process and operationally treat CCNs in a similar fashion to ACO participant TINs and not allow a CCN to switch between ACOs during the performance year, rather than treating them in a similar fashion to an NPI that would be allowed to switch between ACOs during a performance year due to the relative magnitude of services provided by and assignment associated with a CCN, as compared to a much smaller amount of services and assignment associated with a single NPI, as described above. This operational approach would limit the potential for large impacts on performance year expenditure calculations and reduce the potential for gaming opportunities. Including services billed by the CCN as services furnished by the ACO participant is consistent with our policy on the treatment of ACO participant TINs included on the ACO participant list, wherein an entity is deleted from the ACO participant list as of the termination of its ACO participant agreement but claims billed under the ACO participant TIN continue to be included in program operations until the end of the performance year. We proposed to codify this approach for CCNs in the regulations at § 425.402(f)(3)(iii).

We proposed to identify all CCNs associated with ACO participant TINs as determined by the methodology described in the preceding paragraphs for use in assignment and other operations prior to determining historical benchmarks, running quarterly assignment, and financial reconciliation. We noted that we also intend to develop a mechanism for reporting to ACOs all CCNs used in assignment and for purposes of program operations to provide for a transparent process. This CCN information would be provided to ACOs on a periodic basis for informational purposes, and this information will not need to be certified by the ACO.

We proposed that this revised approach to the treatment of CCNs would be applicable for purposes of all program operations for the performance year starting on January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years. We sought comment on all aspects of this proposal.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposed revisions to identifying how CMS certification numbers will be included and used in beneficiary assignment and our responses:

Comment: We received a few comments on this proposal and all were supportive of our proposed approach.

A couple of commenters stated that this approach would create a more accurate assignment list for ACOs that have participant providers that are FQHCs, RHCs, ETA hospitals, and CAHs. These commenters also encouraged CMS to monitor the impacts of this new policy for unintended consequences, such as penalizing ACOs for bringing more safety net providers into the program. Other input included recommendations that CMS solicit feedback from ACOs on the reporting mechanism to ensure that ACOs affected by these policies have a clear understanding of assignment list changes during the performance year and how those changes affect program operations.

Response: We agree that finalizing this proposal will create a more accurate assignment list for ACOs that have FQHCs, RHCs, ETA hospitals and CAHs on their participant list as it will capture changes to CCN enrollment status that occur during the performance year. With regard to the suggestion to monitor the impacts of the use of CCNs in assignment for unintended consequences, such as penalizing ACOs for bringing more safety net providers into the Shared Savings Program, we will include analysis of this as part of our on-going monitoring. We appreciate the recommendation that CMS solicit feedback to ensure that ACOs affected by these policies have a clear understanding of assignment list changes during the performance year and how these changes impact program operations. As stated in our proposal, we intend to develop a mechanism for reporting to ACOs all CCNs used in assignment for the purposes of program operations to provide for a transparent process. This information will be provided to ACOs on a periodic basis throughout the performance year and will be in addition to the feedback provided on beneficiary and provider overlaps that is provided before the participant lists are finalized.

As a result of the public comments, we are finalizing our proposal to add a new provision at § 425.402(f) to reflect how CCNs will be used in assignment for PY 2023 and subsequent performance years. Under § 425.402(f)(1), prior to the start of the performance year and periodically during the performance year, CMS will determine the CCNs for all FQHCs, RHCs, Method II CAHs, and ETA hospitals enrolled under the TIN of an ACO participant, including all CCNs with an active enrollment in Medicare and all CCNs with a deactivated enrollment status. Under § 425.402(f)(2), we will use those CCNs in determining assignment for the performance year. Finally, under § 425.402(f)(3), we specify how changes in CCN enrollment status during the performance year will be reflected in program operations, including but not limited to beneficiary assignment and revenue and expenditure calculations performed quarterly and during financial reconciliation for ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. Specifically, under § 425.402(f)(3)(i), if a CCN with no prior Medicare claims experience enrolls under the TIN of an ACO participant after the ACO certifies its ACO participant list for a performance year as required under § 425.118(a)(3), CMS will consider services furnished by that CCN in determining beneficiary assignment to the ACO for the applicable performance year for ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. Under § 425.402(f)(3)(ii), services furnished by a CCN with a deactivated enrollment status that is enrolled under an ACO participant at the start of a performance year will be considered in determining beneficiary assignment to the ACO for the applicable performance year or benchmark year. Finally, under § 425.402(f)(3)(iii), if a CCN enrolled under the TIN of an ACO participant at the start of the performance year enrolls under a different TIN during a performance year, CMS will continue to treat services billed by the CCN as services furnished by the ACO participant it was enrolled under at the start of the performance year for purposes of determining beneficiary assignment to the ACO for the applicable performance year.

These provisions are being finalized as applicable for purposes of all program operations for the performance year starting on January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years.

4. Quality Performance Standard and Reporting

a. Background

Section 1899(b)(3)(C) of the Act states that the Secretary shall establish quality performance standards to assess the quality of care furnished by ACOs and seek to improve the quality of care furnished by ACOs over time by specifying higher standards, new measures, or both for purposes of assessing such quality of care. As we stated in the November 2011 final rule establishing the Shared Savings Program (76 FR 67872), our principal goal in selecting quality measures for ACOs has been to identify measures of success in the delivery of high-quality health care at the individual and population levels. In the November 2011 final rule, we established a quality measure set spanning four domains: patient experience of care, care coordination/patient safety, preventive health, and at-risk population (76 FR 67872 through 67891). We have subsequently updated the measures that comprise the quality performance measure set for the Shared Savings Program through rulemaking in the CY 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2019 PFS final rules (79 FR 67907 through 67920, 80 FR 71263 through 71268, 81 FR 80484 through 80489, 83 FR 59707 through 59715 respectively).

b. Revising the Shared Savings Program Quality Performance Standard

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46127), we proposed to further refine the quality performance standard for PY 2023 and subsequent performance years through a combination of modifications. Specifically, we noted that we have concerns that the current structure of the quality performance standard creates a cliff of “all-or-nothing” scoring where an ACO may be ineligible to share in savings due to a minor difference between its MIPS Quality performance category score and the quality performance standard required to share in savings at the maximum sharing rate for the applicable performance year. We proposed to adopt an alternative quality performance standard that incorporates a sliding scale to avoid this cliff. This flexibility would be even more important as ACOs transition to eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting and when the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program increases to the 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores starting in PY 2024. Additionally, we proposed to modify our approach for determining shared losses for ACOs in the ENHANCED track that would allow more ACOs to receive a shared loss rate based on a sliding scale rather than automatically being subject to the maximum loss rate of 75 percent. We did not propose to change the current requirements for ACOs to be eligible to share in savings at the maximum sharing rate.

Second, we proposed to extend the incentive for reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs through PY 2024 to align with the sunsetting of the CMS Web Interface reporting option.

Third, we proposed to establish a health equity adjustment that would upwardly adjust an ACO's quality performance score when it delivers high quality care to underserved populations in order to support those ACOs serving a high proportion of underserved individuals, while also encouraging all ACOs to treat underserved populations.

(1) Current Policy

In the CY 2021 PFS final rule, we finalized new Shared Savings Program quality reporting requirements that align with the Alternative Payment Model (APM) Performance Pathway (APP) under the Quality Payment Program and revised the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2021, to reduce reporting burden and focus on patient outcomes. We also finalized a gradual phase-in of the increase in the level of quality performance that would be required for all ACOs to meet the Shared Savings Program quality performance standard. Specifically, for PYs 2021 and 2022, an ACO would be required to achieve a quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the 30th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores to be eligible to share in any savings generated, and for 2023 and subsequent performance years, an ACO would be required to achieve a quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores to be eligible to share in savings (85 FR 84719 through 84736).

We also finalized modifications to the Shared Savings Program regulations on the use of ACO quality performance in determining shared savings and shared losses (85 FR 84736 through 84740). We explained that section 1899(d)(1)(A) of the Act specifies that an ACO is eligible to receive a shared savings payment for a portion of the savings generated for Medicare, provided that the ACO meets both the quality performance standards established by the Secretary and achieves the required level of savings against its historical benchmark. Section 1899(d)(2) of the Act authorizes payments of shared savings under the Shared Savings Program. Specifically, if an ACO meets the quality performance standards established by the Secretary (according to section 1899(b)(3) of the Act) and meets the savings requirements, a percent (as determined appropriate by the Secretary) of the difference between the estimated average per capita Medicare expenditures in the year, adjusted for beneficiary characteristics, and the benchmark for the ACO, may be paid to the ACO as shared savings and the remainder of the difference shall be retained by the Medicare program. Section 1899(d)(2) of the Act also requires the Secretary to establish limits on the total amount of shared savings paid to an ACO. We have also incorporated performance-based risk in the form of shared losses into certain financial models under the Shared Savings Program using the authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to use other payment models.

In the CY 2021 PFS final rule, we finalized an approach to incorporating ACO quality performance in determining shared savings that would allow ACOs to maximize the potential shared savings they could earn across the Shared Savings Program's financial models. Specifically, we replaced the previous sliding scale approach with an all-or-nothing approach to determining shared savings based on quality performance (85 FR 84735). 273 Thus, under the current regulations, for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2021, if an ACO that is otherwise eligible to share in savings meets the quality performance standard established under § 425.512, the ACO will share in any savings generated at the maximum sharing rate according to the applicable financial model, up to the performance payment limit. If the ACO fails to meet the quality performance standard, the ACO will be ineligible to share in savings. Further, we finalized an approach that continued to allow CMS to take into consideration an ACO's quality performance score in calculating the amount of shared losses for certain two-sided models (85 FR 84740). 274 We finalized the following approach to determining the shared loss rate for ACOs participating in the ENHANCED track for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2021, as specified under § 425.610(f)(2). If the ACO meets the quality performance standard established in § 425.512, CMS determines the shared loss rate as follows:

273 We finalized modifications to the regulations to reflect this approach for Track 1 (under § 425.604), Levels A through E of the BASIC track (under § 425.605), Track 2 (under § 425.606), and the ENHANCED track (under § 425.610). The modifications to the regulations under § 425.604(d) governing the determination of the final sharing rate for Track 1 ACOs also applied to Track 1+ Model ACOs (85 FR 84763). We note that participation in Track 1, Track 2 and the Track 1+ Model concluded at the end of PY 2021.

274 This approach continued to allow use of the ACO's quality score in determining the shared loss rate under Track 2 (§ 425.606) and the ENHANCED track (§ 425.610). ACOs participating in the Track 1+ Model, and Level C, D, or E of the BASIC track continued to be subject to a fixed shared loss rate of 30 percent regardless of quality performance. As noted previously, participation in Track 2 and the Track 1+ Model concluded at the end of PY 2021.

• Step 1: Calculate the quotient of the MIPS Quality performance category points earned divided by the total MIPS Quality performance category points available.

• Step 2: Calculate the product of the quotient described in step 1 and the sharing rate of 75 percent under the ENHANCED track.

• Step 3: Calculate the shared loss rate as 1 minus the product determined in step 2. The shared loss rate may not exceed 75 percent and may not be less than 40 percent.

If the ACO fails to meet the quality performance standard, the shared loss rate will be 75 percent.

In the CY 2022 PFS final rule, we finalized an extended phase-in of the modified quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program. Specifically, we extended the phase-in of the quality performance standard for an additional performance year (30th percentile for PYs 2021, 2022, and 2023). We also finalized that, for PYs 2022 and 2023, ACOs choosing to report on the 3 eCQMs/MIPS CQMs (meeting data completeness and case minimum requirements for all 3 measures) would meet the quality performance standard if they achieve a Quality performance category score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least 1 of the 4 outcome measures in the APP measure set and achieve a Quality performance category score equivalent to or higher than the 30th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least 1 of the remaining 5 measures in the APP measure set (86 FR 65253 through 65272).

In summary, pursuant to the policies finalized in the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65266 through 65270), a Shared Savings Program ACO, with the exception of an ACO in the first performance year of its first agreement period, will be eligible to share in savings at the maximum sharing rate if it:

• For PY 2023:

++ Achieves a quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the 30th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, or

++ If the ACO reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 and the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 for all three measures, and achieves a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 30th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining five measures in the APP measure set. Consequently, the ACO would be required to meet the performance benchmark on either 2 outcome measures (one measure at the 10th percentile and the other at the 30th percentile), or 1 outcome measure at the 10th percentile and any other measure in the APP measure set at the 30th percentile. The outcome measures in the APP measure set are listed in Table 63.

• For PY 2024 and subsequent performance years: Achieves a quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring.

We noted in the CY 2022 PFS final rule that we had received several comments suggesting that we revert to the previous sliding scale methodology used prior to the alignment with the APP for determining if an ACO has met the quality performance standard (86 FR 65268 and 65269). We stated in the CY 2022 PFS final rule in response to these comments that we would consider proposing to reinstate the sliding scale methodology for determining shared savings and shared losses in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule for ACOs that report on the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. We stated that under such a proposed sliding scale methodology, we would multiply the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score, based on the ACO's performance on the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs as reported by the ACO, the two claims-based measures calculated by CMS, and the CAHPS for MIPS survey, by the sharing rate for the ACO's track (or payment model within a track) to determine the ACO's shared savings (86 FR 65269).

(2) Scale Shared Savings Based on Quality Performance

In light of the comments received during the public comment period for the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule, we proposed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule to reinstate a modified sliding scale approach for determining shared savings for all ACOs regardless of how they report quality data. In particular, commenters shared their concern that ACOs are now shifting from being compared against other ACOs to broadening this comparison to include all MIPS eligible clinicians (86 FR 65260). We also continue to hear this same concern from a number of interested parties. In addition, as discussed in the proposed rule, if the proposal were limited to eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting, it would require additional complexity specific to the requirements for scaled shared savings and scaled shared losses of the ENHANCED track. We refer readers to the proposed rule (87 FR 46131) for additional rationale for the proposal to apply the sliding scale approach to all ACOs regardless of how they report quality data.

We proposed in § 425.512(a)(4)(ii) and (a)(5)(ii) that, beginning with PY 2023 and for subsequent performance years, if an ACO fails to meet the existing criteria under the quality performance standard to qualify for the maximum sharing rate but the ACO achieves a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set then the ACO would share in savings (if otherwise eligible) at a lower rate that reflects the ACO's quality performance score (87 FR 46129). Specifically, the ACO's final sharing rate would be a scaled rate that is calculated by multiplying the maximum sharing rate for the ACO's track (or payment model within a track) by the ACO's quality performance score. The ACO's quality performance score used in this calculation would reflect the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score plus any health equity adjustment bonus points the ACO is eligible to receive (referred to as the health equity adjusted quality performance score) based on the proposal described in section III.G.4.b.(7) of the proposed rule (87 FR 46132).

For an example of the proposed sliding scale approach for determining shared savings, consider a hypothetical ACO in Level B of the BASIC track in PY 2023 that met the MSR to qualify for shared savings and achieved a health equity adjusted quality performance score of 45 which is less than the 30th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score based on the unweighted distribution. However, the ACO achieved a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set. In this example, the ACO would share in savings (if otherwise eligible) at a lower rate that is scaled by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score. We would calculate the scaled final sharing rate for this ACO by multiplying the maximum sharing rate for an ACO in Level B of the BASIC track of 40 percent by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score of 45 (expressed as a percentage) (that is, 40 percent x 45 percent) to obtain a final sharing rate of 18 percent. We would then multiply the final sharing rate by the ACO's total savings (measured on a first dollar basis) to calculate the ACO's shared savings amount before considering the performance payment limit.

We believe the proposed sliding scale approach meets the statutory requirements of section 1899(b)(3)(C) of the Act, which requires the Secretary to establish quality performance standards to assess the quality of care furnished by ACOs and to seek to improve the quality of care furnished by ACOs over time by specifying higher standards, new measures, or both for purposes of assessing such quality of care. As proposed, ACOs would still transition to a higher quality performance standard equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile to share in savings at the maximum savings rate for their track beginning with PY 2024. Still, the proposal to reinstate a sliding scale approach for determining shared savings for ACOs would allow for flexibility in order to avoid the all-or-nothing approach as the Shared Savings Program transitions to required reporting of eCQMs/MIPS CQMs beginning with PY 2025 after the sunsetting of the CMS Web Interface measure set. As recently as PY 2021, only 12 ACOs reported eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, indicating that most ACOs are still developing their strategy and workflows to combine data across their EHR systems in advance of the requirement to report eCQM/MIPS CQMs beginning in PY 2025. We noted that we believe that the sunsetting of the CMS Web Interface collection, the requirement to report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs beginning in PY 2025, and the increase in the quality performance standard to share in savings at the maximum savings rate starting in PY 2024 will increase the stringency of the quality performance requirements under the Shared Savings Program as contemplated under section 1899(b)(3)(C) of the Act (87 FR 46129).

We believe a scaled approach to the quality performance standard, and thus to the determination of shared savings, would be beneficial because small differences in the distribution of ACOs' MIPS Quality performance category scores and other MIPS reporters' scores for a performance year may result in a large difference in the number of ACOs that fail to meet the quality performance standard as currently defined. Moving away from an all-or-nothing approach to a sliding scale approach to determine shared savings based on ACO quality performance would help to minimize the impact of these fluctuations by allowing ACOs that are close to, but do not achieve the health equity adjusted quality performance score required to share in savings at the maximum sharing rate under their track, to receive some shared savings.

In summary, we proposed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule to revise the provisions governing the quality performance standard at § 425.512(a)(4) and (5) to reflect the alternative quality performance standard (87 FR 46129). Specifically, we proposed to revise § 425.512(a)(4) and (5) to provide for a quality performance standard that an ACO must meet in order to share in savings at the maximum sharing rate under its track (or payment model within a track) and an alternative quality performance standard that an ACO would be required to meet in order to share in savings on a sliding scale. We also proposed to make conforming changes to the methodologies for calculating shared savings under the BASIC track and the ENHANCED track, as specified in § 425.605 and § 425.610, respectively to reflect the proposed sliding scale approach.

In the CY 2023 proposed rule (87 FR 46130), we reiterated our statement in the CY 2022 PFS final rule that for PYs 2022, 2023 and 2024 if an ACO: (1) does not report any of the 10 CMS Web Interface measures or any of the 3 eCQMs/MIPS CQMs; and (2) does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP, the ACO will not meet the quality performance standard (86 FR 65261). We proposed that, for PYs 2023 and 2024, an ACO that does not meet these requirements would also not meet the proposed alternative quality performance standard. For PY 2025 and subsequent performance years, we finalized in the CY 2022 PFS final rule that if an ACO does not report any of the 3 eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP, the ACO will not meet the quality performance standard (86 FR 65262). In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we proposed that, for PY 2025 and subsequent performance years, an ACO that does not meet these requirements would also not meet the proposed alternative quality performance standard (87 FR 46129). The proposals were reflected in the proposed revisions to § 425.512(a)(4) and (5).

The following is a summary of the public comments we received on the proposal and our responses:

Comment: Many commenters supported our proposal to reinstate a modified sliding scale approach for determining shared savings for all ACOs based on quality performance. Many commenters stated that the current structure of the quality performance standard creates a cliff of “all-or-nothing” scoring where an ACO may be ineligible to share in savings due to a minor difference between its MIPS Quality performance category score and the quality performance standard required to share in savings at the maximum sharing rate for the applicable performance year.

Two commenters supported the proposal and stated that the current all-or-nothing scoring is overly punitive and could cause a large portion of ACOs to miss out on shared savings. A few commenters noted that scaling shared savings based on quality performance would encourage ACOs to continue to participate in the program. Another stated that the approach is more supportive of attracting new providers to the ACO program and in helping CMS meet its goal of having all Medicare Parts A and B beneficiaries in accountable care relationships by 2030.

One commenter stated that scaling savings based on quality performance would maintain a focus on achieving quality, while ensuring that ACOs that have opportunities for improvement are not deprived of the financial resources to do so. Two commenters mentioned that scaling shared savings based on quality performance would support providers who furnish care in underserved areas to patients with high unmet health care needs. Another commenter specifically supported the use of the proposed health equity adjusted quality performance score in the sliding shared savings. Several commenters explicitly supported tying the alternative quality performance standard to individual measure benchmarks. Some commenters noted that such an approach would provide more predictability, as these benchmarks are known in advance of the performance period.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' support of our proposal. We note that in section IV.A.3.f of this final rule, we are finalizing that beginning with the CY 2023 performance period/2025 MIPS payment year, we will score administrative claims measures using benchmarks calculated using performance period benchmarks under MIPS. Due to the Shared Savings Program's adoption of the APP beginning in performance year 2021, the benchmark methodology used by MIPS would also be applicable to ACOs. Thus, the two outcome measures in the APP measure set that are administrative claims measures would have performance period benchmarks, which would not be known in advance.

Comment: One commenter noted that a high quality standard is essential to the continued success of the Shared Savings Program and suggested that the sliding scale should only apply to new ACOs for a maximum of 3 performance years as they establish their operations.

Response: We agree that meaningful quality performance standards that assess the quality of care furnished by ACOs and seek to improve such care over time are essential to the continued success of the Shared Savings Program. We refer the commenter to our prior statements regarding achieving such goals through the adoption of higher performance standards over time (see, for example, 85 FR 84734), and we note that we have historically raised the quality performance standard both through the adoption of higher percentile ranking requirements and through the transition to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs ( Id. ).

We believe that both new and existing ACOs would benefit from the application of the sliding scale approach to determining their shared savings throughout their agreement period. In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46129), we stated that our proposal to implement the sliding scale methodology would allow ACOs that otherwise would not have received any shared savings, but perform well on quality to share in a portion of the savings they achieve at a lower rate. We also stated that the sliding scale approach meets the statutory requirements of section 1899(b)(3)(C) of the Act, which requires the Secretary to establish quality performance standards to assess the quality of care furnished by ACOs and to seek to improve the quality of care furnished by ACOs over time by specifying higher standards, new measures, or both for purposes of assessing such quality of care. This policy would also avoid a cliff of “all-or-nothing” scoring where an ACO may be ineligible to share in savings due to a minor difference between its MIPS Quality performance category score and the quality performance standard required to share in savings at the maximum sharing rate for the applicable performance year. Additionally, this policy would provide higher rewards for higher performance potentially allow ACOs to make a greater investment in the infrastructure necessary for transitioning to eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting in performance year 2025 or earlier by enabling certain ACOs to receive shared savings that they otherwise would not have received under the current quality performance standard policies. We believe that the opportunities to make this investment should be available to all ACOs.

Comment: One commenter requested clarification on whether the sliding scale for shared savings would apply to ACOs reporting via the CMS Web Interface while it remains active.

Response: We proposed to apply the sliding scale approach to all ACOs regardless of how they report quality data and are finalizing this policy as proposed. Therefore, for PYs 2023 and 2024, the sliding scale will apply to ACOs reporting quality via the CMS Web Interface.

Comment: We received one comment requesting clarification on how scaling shared savings based on quality performance would operate in practice. The commenter requested that CMS confirm whether, for purposes of determining shared savings, if an ACO reaches the 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores or above, then the ACO would receive 100 percent of savings; and below the 40 percent mark, a sliding scale would be applied.

Response: An example of the sliding scale approach for determining shared savings was included in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 46129) and is restated above. We did not propose to change the current requirements for ACOs to be eligible to share in savings at the maximum sharing rate nor did this proposal modify the maximum sharing rate. 275 Therefore, an ACO that reports quality data via the APP according to the method of submission established by CMS and achieves a quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the 30th percentile (for PY 2023) or 40th percentile (for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years) across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, would be eligible to share in savings at the maximum savings rate under its track (or payment model within a track) up to the performance payment limit (so long as they are not otherwise ineligible to receive shared savings) ( See § 425.512(a)(4)(i) and (a)(5)(i); see also § 425.610(d)(3)). The sliding scale approach will be applied to those ACOs that do not meet the threshold for the applicable performance year.

275 We note for clarity that the maximum savings rate under the ENHANCED track is 75 percent, not 100 percent (§ 425.610(d)(3)).

Comment: Some commenters expressed concerns about issues that were not related to the proposals included in this section of the proposed rule. The issues were related to: sunsetting of the CMS Web Interface in PY 2024 and the requirement to report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs beginning PY 2025; use of the MIPS Quality performance category scores to determine ACO performance; use of primary care-focused measures in the APP measure set; setting the threshold at the 30th and 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category score to share in savings at the maximum savings rate.

Response: We note that we did not propose any changes to these previously finalized policies in the proposed rule, and therefore, these comments are considered to be out of scope. However, we are continuing to monitor the impact of these policies as we gain more experience with ACOs reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. We are exploring how to address some of the concerns related to data aggregation and the all payer requirement and may revisit these and related issues in future rulemaking based on lessons learned. We have reviewed the public comments, and for the reasons stated above and in the proposed rule, we are finalizing our proposals as proposed to scale shared savings based on quality performance and will reinstate a modified sliding scale approach for determining shared savings for all ACOs regardless of how they report quality data. Specifically, we are finalizing the proposed revisions to the quality performance standard at § 425.512(a)(4)(ii) and (a)(5)(ii) to reflect the alternative quality performance standard that an ACO will be required to meet in order to share in savings on a sliding scale. We also are finalizing proposed revisions to make conforming changes to the methodologies for calculating shared savings under the BASIC track and the ENHANCED track, as specified in § 425.605 and § 425.610, respectively to reflect the sliding scale approach.

(3) Modify Methodology for Determining Scaled Shared Losses for the ENHANCED Track Based on Quality Performance

We proposed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule to modify the methodology used to determine shared losses for ACOs in the ENHANCED track (87 FR 46130). Under our current regulations at § 425.610(f)(2), for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2021, an ACO in the ENHANCED track must meet the quality performance standard in order to have its shared losses scaled based on its quality performance and avoid automatically facing the maximum shared loss rate of 75 percent. We proposed that for PY 2023, and subsequent performance years, we would determine the ACO's shared loss rate using a sliding scale approach for an ACO that has losses that exceed its minimum loss rate and either meets the existing quality performance standard applicable for the performance year (that is, an ACO that would currently be eligible for shared losses scaled based on quality performance) or that does not meet that standard but achieves a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set (87 FR 46130). As proposed, an ACO that meets the existing quality performance standard or that meets the new alternative standard would be subject to a scaled shared loss rate equal to 1 minus the product of the maximum sharing rate for the ENHANCED track (75 percent) and the ACO's quality performance score. The ACO's quality performance score used in this calculation would reflect the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score plus any health equity adjustment bonus points the ACO is eligible to receive (referred to as the health equity adjusted quality performance score) based on the proposal described in section III.G.4.b.(7) of the proposed rule. The scaled shared loss rate would be subject to a minimum of 40 percent and a maximum of 75 percent. An ACO that fails to achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set would continue to automatically share in losses at the maximum shared loss rate of 75 percent. Likewise, as proposed, an ACO that fails to achieve the proposed alternative quality performance standard because it (1) does not report any of the ten CMS Web Interface Measures (for PY 2023 or PY 2024) or any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs (for PY 2025 or subsequent performance year) and (2) does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP as described in section III.G.4.b.(2) of the proposed rule would also automatically share in losses at the maximum rate.

As explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46130), the above proposal, by itself, would not materially change the current methodology for determining shared losses for ENHANCED track ACOs that meet the existing quality performance standard (or would meet the criteria for the eCQM/MIPS CQM incentive), but would newly allow for the application of a scaled shared loss rate for ENHANCED track ACOs that achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set, as opposed to these ACOs automatically receiving the maximum shared loss rate under the ENHANCED track of 75 percent as required under the current regulations at § 425.610(f)(2)(ii). That is, more ACOs would have the opportunity to lower their shared loss rate below the maximum rate based on their quality performance.

In practice, an ACO would need to achieve a health equity adjusted quality performance score of higher than 33 and one-third in order to have a shared loss rate below 75 percent under the proposed approach. That is, a score greater than 33 1/3 is needed for the scaled shared loss rate formula to yield a value less than 75 percent. For an ACO with a score of exactly 33 and one-third, the shared loss rate calculated by the formula would equal 75 percent. For an ACO with a score below 33 and one-third, the calculated rate would be greater than 75 percent, triggering the application of the maximum shared loss rate of 75 percent.

We noted that the proposal to determine the shared loss rate using the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score uses language that is different from the phrasing used in the current regulation at § 425.610(f)(2), which describes the shared loss rate as being calculated using “the quotient of the MIPS Quality performance category points earned divided by the total MIPS Quality performance category points available” (87 FR 46130). As indicated in the CY 2021 PFS final rule, this approach allowed CMS to continue to scale shared losses by the ACO's quality score under the Shared Savings Program's two-sided models with the highest levels of risk and potential reward, the ENHANCED track and the Track 2 (although PY 2021 was last year in which ACOs participated under this financial model) (85 FR 84736 through 84740). The phrasing “the quotient of the MIPS Quality performance category points earned divided by the total MIPS Quality performance category points available” represents a mechanical description of how the score is calculated to clarify that the scaling factor represented a value between 0 and 1 which, in turn, would ensure that the shared loss rate falls between 0 and 100 percent (before the application of the minimum or maximum shared loss rate). However, upon further consideration, we noted that we believe that this phrasing may cause unnecessary confusion (87 FR 46130). For example, it does not clarify whether or how applicable MIPS bonus points or quality improvement points would be incorporated or how the calculation would be impacted if the ACO is subject to the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy described in § 425.512(b). Furthermore, as discussed in the proposed rule, it would not address the treatment of health equity adjustment bonus points, if the proposed health equity adjustment described in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46132) was finalized. As we have described in prior rulemaking (85 FR 84735), the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score accounts for any MIPS bonus points and quality improvement points and the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy in § 425.512(b), which we proposed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule to redesignate as § 425.512(c), indicates how an ACO's quality performance score will be determined if the ACO is affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance. Furthermore, an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score would always take on a value between 0 and 100 as the MIPS Quality performance category score itself will always fall between 0 and 100 and the application of the proposed health equity adjustment, if finalized, would be restricted from raising the health equity adjusted quality performance score above 100. As a result, an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score could be expressed as a percentage that would also ensure that the scaled shared loss rate falls between 0 and 100 percent (before the application of the minimum or maximum shared loss rate). Therefore, we explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule that we favor using the phrasing “health equity adjusted quality performance score” in describing our proposed methodology for determining the shared loss rate for ENHANCED track ACOs for PY 2023 onward, and we also noted that this phrasing would align with the terminology used in the description of the proposed sliding scale approach for determining shared savings (87 FR 46129).

For an example of the sliding scale approach for determining shared losses, consider a hypothetical ACO participating in the ENHANCED track in PY 2023 that had total losses above its minimum loss rate and achieved a health equity adjusted quality performance score of 45, which is less than the 30th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score based on the unweighted distribution. If the ACO achieves a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set, it would share in losses at a rate that is scaled by the ACO's quality performance score. We explained that we would calculate the scaled shared loss rate for this ACO as 1 minus the maximum shared loss rate for the ENHANCED track of 75 percent multiplied by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score of 45 (expressed as a percentage) [1−(45 percent × 75 percent)] to obtain a shared loss rate of 66.25 percent. We would then multiply this shared loss rate by the ACO's total losses (measured on a first dollar basis) to calculate the ACO's shared losses before consideration of the loss recoupment limit.

We proposed to revise § 425.610(f) to provide for this scaled approach to the determination of shared losses.

The following is a summary of the public comments we received on the proposal and our responses:

Comment: Several commenters supported the proposal to modify the methodology for calculating scaled shared losses under the ENHANCED track using the sliding scale approach. Some of the commenters stated that the proposal will provide a more balanced loss sharing rate to ACOs and prevent ACOs in the ENHANCED track from becoming automatically subject to the 75 percent loss rate.

Response: We appreciate commenters' support for our proposal.

After reviewing the comments that we received on this proposal, and for the reasons stated above and in the proposed rule, we are finalizing our proposal as proposed to revise § 425.610(f) to scale shared savings starting in CY 2023 based on quality performance consistent with our final policy described above to reinstate a modified sliding scale approach for determining shared savings and shared losses for all ACOs regardless of how they report quality data.

(4) Additional Considerations Related to Proposed Modifications to Advanced APM Criteria

Section 414.1415(b)(1) through (3) requires that to be an Advanced APM, an APM must include quality measure performance as a factor when determining payment to Advanced APM participants. Specifically, § 414.1415(b)(1) through (3) require, in relevant part, that two quality measures, one of which is an outcome measure, be a factor when determining payment to Advanced APM participants. In the Shared Savings Program, the ENHANCED track and Level E of the BASIC track are currently Advanced APMs, and we expect them to be Advanced APMs in the future. As part of our proposal in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule to permit ACOs that fail to meet the existing criteria under the quality performance standard to share in savings at a lower rate (if otherwise eligible) (87 FR 46129), we proposed that an ACO must achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set. We noted that this approach would not meet the current requirements for an Advanced APM at § 414.1415(b)(2) and (b)(3). We explained that this is because the proposal permits the use of a single outcome measure as a factor when determining payment. We noted that in section IV.A.4.a of the proposed rule (87 FR 46131), we also proposed to modify the Advanced APM criteria to allow for a single quality measure to be used to meet both quality measure criteria at § 414.1415(b)(2) and (b)(3). We proposed to align the proposal with the proposed modifications to § 414.1415(b)(2) and (b)(3). As such, we proposed in § 425.512(a)(4)(ii) and (a)(5)(ii) to require that an ACO meet only one of the four outcome measures for the ACO to be eligible to share in savings at a lower rate.

As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46131), if the proposal to revise § 414.1415(b)(2) and (b)(3) were not finalized, we would consider finalizing the following alternate policy based on comments received. Beginning with PY 2023 and for subsequent performance years, if an ACO fails to meet the existing criteria under the quality performance standard to qualify for the maximum sharing rate, but the ACO achieves a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 30th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining measures in the APP measure set, then the ACO would share in savings (if otherwise eligible) at a lower rate that reflects the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score (87 FR 46131). The ACO would consequently be required to meet the performance benchmark on either 2 outcome measures (one outcome measure at the 10th percentile and another measure at the 30th percentile), or 1 outcome measure at the 10th percentile and any other measure in the APP measure set at the 30th percentile to maintain consistency with the requirements of § 414.1415(b)(1) through (3) (87 FR 46131).

We also stated that with respect to shared losses for ACOs in the ENHANCED track, we would consider finalizing a parallel approach that would allow for application of a scaled shared loss rate for ENHANCED track ACOs that achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 30th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining measures in the APP measure set (87 FR 46131).

We solicited comment on the alternative to our proposed revisions to § 425.512(a) and (b) adopted above, which would have required that, in order to meet the alternative performance standard and share in savings at a reduced rate, an ACO must achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 30th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining measures in the APP measure set.

We did not receive any comments on this alternative approach.

We note that in section IV.A.4.a of this final rule, we are also finalizing the proposal to modify the Advanced APM criteria to allow for a single quality measure to be used to meet both quality measure criteria at § 414.1415(b)(2) and (b)(3). Our final policy, described in section III.G.4.b.(2) above, aligns with the final modifications to § 414.1415(b)(2) and (b)(3). As such, we are not finalizing the alternative discussed in this section.

(5) Broad Applicability of the Final Policy To Apply the Sliding Scale Approach To Determining Shared Savings for ACOs

We proposed to apply the sliding scale approach to determine shared savings for all qualifying ACOs and to determine shared losses for ENHANCED track ACOs regardless of how they report quality data to CMS in order to maintain consistency in the treatment of quality performance across all ACOs (87 FR 46131). We noted that we believe inclusion of all qualifying ACOs in this proposal regardless of reporting method would be responsive to the concerns expressed by interested parties regarding the perceived inequality in comparing MIPS quality scores between the Shared Savings Program and the traditional MIPS program. Specifically, as discussed in the proposed rule, ACOs have indicated they are limited to reporting the measures included under the APP, whereas traditional MIPS participants have a broader range of measures to select and report (86 FR 65268). We discussed that the proposal to implement the sliding scale methodology would allow ACOs that otherwise would not have received any shared savings, but perform well on quality to share in a portion of the savings they achieve, but at a lower rate. This policy would also potentially allow ACOs to make a greater investment in the infrastructure necessary for transitioning to eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting in PY 2025 or earlier by enabling certain ACOs to receive shared savings that they otherwise would not have received under the current quality performance standard policies. Furthermore, we noted that if we were to finalize the proposal, these ACOs would have additional funds available that they could choose to invest in advancing health equity.

We sought comments on all aspects of the proposals to scale shared savings and shared losses discussed in sections III.G.4.b.(2) through (5) of the proposed rule, including the alternative approach if the proposed changes to § 414.1415(b)(2) and (b)(3) are not finalized.

Our responses to the comments received on the proposals to scale shared savings and shared losses along with a description of our final policies can be found in sections III.G.4.b.(2) through (4) of this final rule.

In summary, we are finalizing as proposed our proposals to revise § 425.512(a)(4) and (a)(5) to apply a sliding scale approach to determine shared savings for all qualifying ACOs and to determine shared losses for ENHANCED track ACOs regardless of how they report quality data to CMS in order to maintain consistency in the treatment of quality performance across all ACOs.

(6) Extension of eCQM/MIPS CQM Incentive

We separately proposed to revise § 425.512(a)(4) and (5) to extend the incentive for reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs through PY 2024 to align with the timeline for sunsetting of the CMS Web Interface reporting option and to allow ACOs an additional year to gauge their performance on the eCQM/MIPS CQMs before full reporting of the measures are required beginning in PY 2025 (87 FR 46132). We originally adopted this incentive in the CY 2022 PFS final rule to encourage ACOs to begin the transition to eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting in PYs 2022 and 2023 (86 FR 65269). Under the current incentive:

• If an ACO reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 and the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and;

• Achieves a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and;

• A quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 30th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining five measures in the APP measure set, the ACO will meet the quality performance standard used to determine eligibility for shared savings and to avoid maximum shared losses, if applicable.

In the CY 2022 PFS final rule, we finalized our proposal to freeze the quality performance standard at the 30th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores for PY 2023 (86 FR 65269). Therefore, under the current regulations, beginning with PY 2024 and subsequent performance years, an ACO must achieve a quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring (86 FR 65270). To align with the finalized policy from the CY 2022 PFS final rule, we proposed to update the eCQM/MIPS CQM incentive for PY 2024 to include this requirement. Under the proposed update to the incentive for PY 2024:

• If an ACO reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 and the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and;

• Achieves a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and;

• A quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining five measures in the APP measure set, the ACO will meet the quality performance standard used to determine eligibility for shared savings and to avoid maximum shared losses, if applicable. (87 FR 46132)

We sought comment on this proposal.

In addition, we sought comment on whether CMS should incorporate the proposed amendments to § 414.1415(b)(2) and (b)(3) described in section IV.A.4.a. of the proposed rule into the eCQM/MIPS CQM incentive. As explained in the proposed rule (87 FR 46132), incorporating the proposal would result in an ACO only having to achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures to qualify for the incentive in PY 2023 and PY 2024.

We also explained that if we were to modify the eCQM/MIPS CQM incentive to align with the proposed modifications to § 414.1415(b)(2) and (b)(3), we would make corresponding changes to the proposed regulatory text at § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ) by removing the requirement that an ACO achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 30th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining five measures in the APP measure set in order to meet the quality performance standard used to determine eligibility for shared savings and to avoid maximum shared losses, if applicable. In addition, we would make corresponding changes to the regulatory text governing the eCQM/MIPS CQM incentive for PY 2023 at § 425.512(a)(4)(i)(B). We noted that the requirements to qualify for the eCQM/MIPS CQM incentive for PY 2022 would not be affected by the proposed modifications to § 414.1415(b)(2) and (b)(3).

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposed extension of the eCQM/MIPS CQM incentive and our responses:

Comment: Many commenters supported the proposal to extend the incentive for reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs through PY 2024. Some commenters mentioned that the incentive may help to ease the transition to eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting. One commenter suggested that we extend the incentive beyond 2024 to facilitate the national shift towards eCQM. One commenter indicated if the incentive proves to be effective in getting more ACOs to submit eCQMs, then it suggests that we extend the incentive beyond 2024 to facilitate the national shift towards eCQMs.

Response: We appreciate commenters' support for the proposal. We are not extending the incentive beyond performance year 2024 at this time because this policy is intended to align with the timeline for sunsetting of the CMS Web Interface reporting option at the end of performance year 2024. We will continue to monitor the impact of this policy as we gain more experience with ACOs reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and may revisit the policy in future rulemaking.

Comment: Several commenters suggested that CMS provide greater incentives to offset the financial and operational investments needed for ACOs transitioning to eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting before PY 2025. Some commenters urged CMS to provide ACOs reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs prior to 2025 with pay-for-reporting status for all three measures included in the APP measure set or, alternatively, to provide upfront funding and/or adjustments to financial benchmarks, or an increased savings rate to provide funding and incentives for ACOs to report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs prior to 2025.

Response: In this final rule, we are finalizing a number of policies that would strengthen incentives for ACOs to report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and thereby, making available funds for ACOs to make appropriate investments needed to transition to reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs prior to PY 2025. Additionally, beginning in PY 2021, ACOs that meet the quality performance standard detailed in § 425.512 are eligible to share in savings at the maximum rate allowable by track. Prior to the implementation of this standard, only ACOs in the first year of their first agreement period with the Shared Savings Program or ACOs with a perfect quality score were eligible to share in savings at the maximum rate. This policy enables ACOs to share in savings at a rate higher than was previously permitted under the sliding scale approach. For example, prior to PY 2021, an ACO in Level B of the BASIC track (otherwise eligible to share in savings) with a quality performance score equal to 90 percent would have earned a sharing rate of 36 percent, which is the product of the maximum sharing rate for an ACO in Level B of the BASIC track (40 percent) multiplied by the ACO's quality performance score of 90 (expressed as a percentage) (that is, 40 percent × 90 percent, or 36 percent). Under the current policy, an ACO in Level B of the BASIC track (otherwise eligible to share in savings) with a quality performance score at or above the standard established in § 425.512 would share in savings at the maximum rate. In this example, the ACO's sharing rate would have increased from 36 percent to 40 percent. We believe that this increased sharing rate is another opportunity for ACOs to use additional funds for reinvestment. In section III.G.4.b.2 of this final rule, we are finalizing the proposal to implement the sliding scale methodology to allow ACOs that otherwise would not have received any shared savings, but perform well on quality to share in a portion of the savings they achieve, but at a lower rate. This policy would also potentially allow ACOs to make a greater investment in the infrastructure necessary for transitioning to eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting in PY 2025 or earlier by enabling certain ACOs to receive shared savings that they otherwise would not have received under the current quality performance standard policies. In section III.G.4.b.7 of this final rule, we are finalizing the application of health equity adjustment for ACOs that report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. Through the health equity adjustment, ACOs that perform well on the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in the APP measure set and serve a large proportion of underserved individuals within their assigned beneficiary population may receive up to 10 bonus points. These ACOs could see the largest increases in their quality performance score and would have the most significant impact on determining the rate at which the ACO shares in savings, or for ACOs under the ENHANCED track, the rate at which the ACO shares in losses.

To support ACOs in rural and other underserved areas in building the infrastructure needed to succeed in the program, in section III.G.2.a of this final rule, we are finalizing policies to implement advance investment payments for qualifying ACOs, which include a one-time fixed payment of $250,000 and quarterly payments for the first 2 years of an ACO's 5-year agreement period. In section III.G.5.c.(4) of this final rule, we are finalizing revisions to the benchmarking methodology to reduce the effect of ACO performance on ACO historical benchmarks. We expect these policies will strengthen the incentives for ACOs, including ACOs caring for medically complex, high cost beneficiaries, and/or underserved populations to enter and remain in the Shared Savings Program.

We believe that these policies, coupled with the extension of the eCQM/MIPS incentive that we are finalizing, may provide ACOs with additional resources needed to invest in the infrastructure necessary to transition to reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs.

Comment: Commenters supported the idea of modifying the eCQM/MIPS CQM incentive to permit an ACO to meet the quality performance standard when achieving a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures consistent with the proposed amendments to § 414.1415(b)(2) and (b)(3) as described in section IV.A.4.a. of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule.

Response: With the finalization of the alternative quality performance standard discussed in section III.G.4.b.2 of this final rule, which would qualify an ACO to share in savings but at a lower rate that is scaled based on the ACO's quality performance, we believe that it is appropriate for the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive to have a higher standard such that ACOs that qualify for the eCQM/MIPS CQM incentive would be eligible to share in savings at the maximum sharing rate.

Comment: Several commenters requested clarification of whether FQHC-only ACOs are required to report MIPS CQMs starting in PY 2025. These commenters noted that currently FQHCs are exempt from MIPS reporting, and they would need technical assistance from CMS on how utilize existing reporting requirements to satisfy MIPS reporting as an ACO.

Response: We note that the reference to “MIPS CQMs” refers not to participation in the Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) but to a particular quality measure collection type and means of submitting quality data used by both MIPS and the Shared Savings Program. 276 In the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84720-34), we finalized that Shared Savings Program ACOs are required to report quality data under the Advanced Payment Model (APM) Performance Pathway (APP), which permits the reporting of both eCQMs and MIPS CQMs for the purposes of the Shared Savings Program. In the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65262), we finalized that in order to meet the quality reporting requirements under the Shared Savings Program for PY 2025 and subsequent performance years, an ACO must report the three eCQMs or three MIPS CQMs, administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey and CMS will calculate the two claims-based measures included under the APP. If an ACO does not report any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP, the ACO will not meet the Shared Savings Program's quality performance standard. The policies discussed in this section and the corresponding proposal do not change the applicability of Merit-based Incentive Program to FQHCs. We refer interested parties to review the resources available on the QPP website on https://qpp.cms.gov/resources/resource-library regarding how to report under the APP.

276 See Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, MIPS Participating in the Quality Performance Category in the 2022 Performance Year: Traditional MIPS 20-31 (Aug. 22, 2022), available at https://qpp-cm-prod-content.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/1971/2022%20Quality%20User%20Guide.pdf .

Comment: Some commenters expressed concerns about issues that were not related to the proposal included in this section of the proposed rule. For example, commenters expressed multiple concerns regarding the requirement to report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs beginning PY 2025, such as issues related to meeting all-payer data requirements, data completeness requirements, data aggregation and deduplication issues, and interoperability issues among different EHRs. A few commenters suggested that a pilot study of eCQM reporting be done first for a subset of ACOs before making it a program-wide requirement. Other commenters were concerned about the use of the MIPS Quality performance category scores to determine ACO performance and raising the threshold to the 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores to share in savings at the maximum savings rate in PY 2024.

Response: We note that we did not propose any changes to these previously finalized policies, and therefore, these comments are considered to be out of scope. We note that the sliding scale methodology that we are finalizing in this final rule would alleviate concerns related to the increase in the threshold for sharing in savings at the maximum rate to 40th percentile of all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, beginning in PY 2024 since it would allow ACOs that otherwise would have not received any shared savings, but perform well on quality to share in a portion of the savings they achieve, but at a lower rate. We are exploring how to address some concerns related to data aggregation, de-duplication of patient data, and the all payer requirement and may revisit these and related issues in future rulemaking based on lessons learned. After consideration of the public comments and for the reasons stated above and in the proposed rule (87 FR 46132), we are finalizing our proposed revisions to § 425.512(a)(4) and (5) to extend the incentive for reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs through PY 2024 to align with the timeline for sunsetting of the CMS Web Interface reporting option and to allow ACOs an additional year to gauge their performance on the eCQM/MIPS CQMs before full reporting of the measures are required beginning in PY 2025. Specifically, we are finalizing an update to the incentive for PY 2024 such that:

• If an ACO reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 and the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and:

• Achieves a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and;

• A quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining five measures in the APP measure set, the ACO will meet the quality performance standard used to determine eligibility for shared savings and to avoid maximum shared losses, if applicable.

Performance benchmarks used to determine the 10th and 40th percentiles will be posted on the Quality Payment Program Resource Library website at https://qpp.cms.gov/resources/resource-library . Performance benchmarks differ by collection type (that is, eCQM, MIPS CQM) and are updated for each performance year.

(7) Health Equity Adjustment for ACOs That Report All-Payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and Are High Performing on Quality, and Serve a High Proportion of Underserved Beneficiaries

(a) Background and Overview

Health care outcome inequalities exist among patients throughout the United States, and empirical research has found that certain patient characteristics are associated with worse health outcomes. Patients experiencing worse health outcomes often face barriers to accessing health care services and have access to fewer health care providers. This research also provides evidence of the relationships between socioeconomic status/social risk factors and health care outcomes. Section 2(d) of the Improving Medicare Post-Acute Care Transformation (IMPACT) Act of 2014 (Pub. L. 113-185) called for the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) to conduct a study evaluating the effect of individuals' socioeconomic status (SES) on quality measures and measures of resource use under the Medicare program. The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Education's (ASPE) March 2020 Report to Congress: Social Risk Factors and Performance in Medicare's Value-Based Purchasing (VBP) Program, provides insight into whether and how value-based programs should account for beneficiaries' social risk factors such as income, housing, transportation, and nutrition that might adversely affect their access to health care services or health outcomes. A key finding is that dual enrollment status is a strong predictor of poorer health care quality measure outcomes in Medicare's VBP programs, even when accounting for other social and functional risk factors. 277 In addition, several peer-reviewed research studies demonstrate that neighborhood-level factors for those residing in disadvantaged neighborhoods also have a relationship to worse health outcomes for these residents. Living in an area with an ADI score of 85 or above, a validated measure of neighborhood disadvantage, is shown to be a predictor of 30-day readmission rates, lower rates of cancer survival, poor end of life care for patients with heart failure, and longer lengths of stay and fewer home discharges post-knee surgery even after accounting for individual social and economic risk factors. 278 279 280 281 282 Many rural areas also have relatively high levels of neighborhood disadvantage and high ADI levels. We believe dual Medicare and Medicaid eligibility and ADI score are good indicators of beneficiaries with high needs. Dual eligibility, an indicator at the beneficiary level, is intended to capture socioeconomic challenges that could affect a beneficiary's ability to access care, while ADI, a neighborhood-level indicator, is intended to capture local socioeconomic factors correlated with medical disparities and underservice. We refer readers to the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65382 through 65384) for a detailed review of the literature on health care outcome inequalities. The information included in these articles and reports informed our decision to propose and finalize with modification a health equity adjustment in connection with ACO quality performance and our consideration of the appropriate criteria for determining ACO eligibility for the adjustment.

277 U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, “Executive Summary: Report to Congress: Social Risk Factors and Performance in Medicare's Value-Based Purchasing Program,” Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, March 2020. Available at https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/migrated_legacy_files//195046/Social-Risk-in-Medicare%E2%80%99s-VBP-2nd-Report-Executive-Summary.pdf .

278 Kind AJ, et al., “Neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage and 30-day rehospitalization: a retrospective cohort study.” Annals of Internal Medicine. No. 161(11), pp 765-74, doi: 10.7326/M13-2946 (December 2, 2014), available at https://www.acpjournals.org/doi/epdf/10.7326/M13-2946 . 279 Jencks SF, et al., “Safety-Net Hospitals, Neighborhood Disadvantage, and Readmissions Under Maryland's All-Payer Program.” Annals of Internal Medicine. No. 171, pp 91-98, doi:10.7326/M16-2671 (July 16, 2019), available at https://www.acpjournals.org/doi/epdf/10.7326/M16-2671 . 280 Cheng E, et al., “Neighborhood and Individual Socioeconomic Disadvantage and Survival Among Patients With Nonmetastatic Common Cancers.” JAMA Network Open Oncology. No. 4(12), pp 1-17, doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.39593 (December 17, 2021), available at https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2787244 . 281 Hutchinson RN, et al., “Rural disparities in end-of-life care for patients with heart failure: Are they due to geography or socioeconomic disparity?” The Journal of Rural Health. No. 38, pp 457-463, doi: 10.1111/jrh.12597 (2022), available at https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/epdf/10.1111/jrh.12597 . 282 Khlopas A, et al., “Neighborhood Socioeconomic Disadvantages Associated With Prolonged Lengths of Stay, Nonhome Discharges, and 90-Day Readmissions After Total Knee Arthroplasty.” The Journal of Arthroplasty. No. 37(6), pp S37-S43, doi: 10.1016/j.arth.2022.01.032 (June 2022), available at https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0883540322000493 .

As discussed in section III.G.4.f. of the proposed rule (87 FR 46154 and 46155), health equity, addressing health disparities, and closing the performance gap on the quality of care provided to underserved populations continue to be high priorities for the Agency through inclusion of health equity initiatives in CMS programs, and better addressing the social needs of people with Medicare is an important part of this strategy. As discussed in the proposed rule, we are committed to achieving health equity for Medicare beneficiaries by supporting ACOs in quality improvement activities to reduce health disparities, enabling Medicare beneficiaries to make more informed decisions, and promoting provider accountability for health care disparities. 283 284 Further, we have set forth a goal that 100 percent of people with Original Medicare will be in a care relationship with accountability for quality and total cost of care by 2030, and are focused on expanding the reach of ACOs into rural and other underserved communities. Among other considerations for reaching this goal, CMS is examining the use of incentives to close gaps in outcomes for Medicare beneficiaries. 285 In section III.G.2.a. of the proposed rule (87 FR 46098 through 46110), we proposed to provide advance shared savings in the form of AIPs to certain ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program using beneficiary dual eligibility status and ADI data to determine the amount of quarterly payments. To align with these goals, we proposed a health equity adjustment that would upwardly adjust quality performance scores for ACOs that serve a high proportion of underserved individuals and achieve high quality performance.

283 CMS website, “What is the CMS National Quality Strategy?” https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-Instruments/QualityInitiativesGenInfo/Legacy-Quality-Strategy (last accessed June 10, 2022). 284 CMS Fact Sheet, “CMS National Quality Strategy,” April 2022, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/cms-national-quality-strategy-fact-sheet-april-2022.pdf .

285 Jacobs D, Rawal P, Fowler L, Seshamani M, “Perspective: Expanding Accountable Care's Reach among Medicare Beneficiaries.” New England Journal of Medicine (April 27, 2022), https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp2202991 .

As discussed in section III.G.4.a. of the proposed rule (87 FR 46127 through 46129), section 1899(b)(3)(C) of the Act states that the Secretary shall establish quality performance standards to assess the quality of care furnished by ACOs, while section 1899(b)(3)(A) of the Act provides that that the Secretary shall determine appropriate measures to assess the quality of care furnished by the ACO. We stated that we have concerns that our current quality performance standard and the quality performance measures we have adopted do not adequately assess the quality of care provided by ACOs with clinicians who serve a high proportion of underserved individuals. We also stated that we have similar concerns that the current quality performance standard and quality measures set do not adequately incentivize all ACOs to provide high quality care to underserved beneficiaries nor do we want to create an incentive for ACOs to avoid underserved populations as we transition to all payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs because patients with social risk factors tend to have worse quality scores overall. The concern about lower quality scores for underserved populations is magnified in eCQMs compared to reporting via the CMS Web Interface, because all-payer reporting in eCQMs includes quality scores for people with Medicaid (correlating with low levels of income and increased prevalence social risk factors when compared to people with Medicare); whereas, historical reporting via the CMS Web Interface has only included those quality scores for people with Medicare. Therefore, ACOs that serve a higher proportion of Medicaid enrollees may receive lower quality scores during the switch to eCQMs without an adjustment. In turn, without an adjustment during the switch to eCQMs, ACOs that serve a higher proportion of people with Medicaid or other underserved populations outside of Medicare could be incentivized to avoid underserved populations, delay switching to eCQMs for as long as possible, or even cease participation in the Shared Savings Program altogether. We stated that this concern has been raised by interested parties serving large proportions of underserved populations.

We have previously been urged to adopt risk-adjusted quality measures that account for beneficiary characteristics such as geographic location, socioeconomic status, education, race, ethnicity, gender, preferred language, disability status, or health literacy (76 FR 67873). A number of our measures do adjust for certain beneficiary characteristics, such as age and gender; however, we do not broadly adjust measure performance on the numerous demographic characteristics listed. Quality performance approaches that incorporate risk adjustment, while intended to promote equity, can mask real differences in quality and make it more difficult to identify and address disparities where they exist. Risk adjustment for social risk factors may also have the unintended effect of setting lower quality standards for underserved populations, rather than ensuring high quality standards for all populations receiving care that is established in the move to eCQM/MIPS CQM all payer quality measures.

In considering how to modify the existing quality performance requirements under the Shared Savings Program to more fully assess the quality of care furnished by ACOs that serve a high proportion of underserved individuals, we believe that rather than risk adjusting for disparities in the health status of underserved populations, it would be more appropriate to adopt an approach that rewards high quality performance across all populations served by an ACO. For this reason, we proposed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule to revise how we assess the quality of care furnished by ACOs through the creation of a health equity adjustment designed to support those ACOs serving a high proportion of underserved individuals while also mitigating disparities in health care by encouraging all ACOs to treat underserved populations (87 FR 46127 through 46142). We noted that we believe the approach, as proposed, would also continue encouraging high ACO quality performance, reinforce ACOs' transition to reporting all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and provide an incentive for ACOs to provide high quality care to all of the populations they serve. Additionally, because every year a greater proportion of ACOs are making the switch to eCQMs, instituting a health equity adjustment for those ACOs making the switch to eCQMs will allow us to study the impacts and make refinements during subsequent rulemaking.

As described in the proposed rule (87 FR 46132 through 46142), we proposed that the health equity adjustment would be available for PY 2023 and for subsequent performance years to an ACO that reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and administers the CAHPS for MIPS survey. We proposed such ACOs may receive up to a maximum of 10 additional points added to their MIPS Quality performance category score. The level of the adjustment would be determined based on the joint consideration of an ACO's performance on quality measures and the population served by the ACO, such that ACOs that perform well on quality measures and serve a higher proportion of beneficiaries who are from underserved neighborhoods (residing in census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of 85 or higher) or are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid would receive a higher number of bonus points.

The following is a summary of the general public comments we received on the overall proposal to add a health equity adjustment to the MIPS Quality performance category score for ACOs that report all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, are high performing on quality, and serve a high proportion of underserved beneficiaries and our responses:

Comment: Numerous commenters shared their support for our health equity adjustment proposal. Many commenters specifically supported the proposal to incorporate a health equity adjustment to an ACO's MIPS quality performance category score. Several commenters agreed that this adjustment will reward and incentivize ACOs for providing high-quality care to underserved populations, will help achieve the goal of greater health equity, and that ACOs are uniquely positioned to improve and innovate on population health efforts. One commenter also appreciated that the heath equity adjustment is designed to increase ACO performance and not decrease scores; another commenter appreciated that this approach did not set lower quality standards. Another commenter appreciated CMS's review of its own regulations to identify and remediate those that reinforce or fail to mitigate health inequities. One commenter supported the use of the health equity adjustment among providers who report eCQMs, asserting that eCQMs are the future of quality reporting and these providers should not be left behind. Another commenter agreed that this aspect of the proposal will negate concerns that the transition to all-payer measures would impact savings for providers who treat a higher proportion of underserved populations.

Some commenters supported the proposal and agreed with CMS that the proposed health equity adjustment is better than a risk adjustment approach. One commenter applauded CMS for not masking health disparities through risk adjustment. A few commenters generally supported a policy to improve health equity in the Shared Savings Program, but noted it should be pilot tested first to ensure that it does not have unintended consequences. Additional commenters urged us to carefully monitor the health equity adjustment after implementation.

While these commenters were all supportive of the health equity adjustment proposal and recognized the importance of supporting health equity in the Shared Savings Program, many shared additional feedback on specific aspects of this proposal which is summarized below in each subsection of the proposal.

Response: We appreciate the comments in support of the proposed health equity adjustment. Regarding the use of the health equity adjustment instead of risk adjustment, we appreciate commenters' support for the approach. We agree with commenters who supported the use of the health equity adjustment among ACOs that report all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs.

Regarding the need to pilot test the health equity adjustment, we expect the early years of this policy to effectively serve this purpose given that the adjustment will only be applicable to ACOs that report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, which currently represent a small portion of all ACOs. We note that we do intend to monitor the impact of the adjustment and may, as necessary, consider modifications to the design of the adjustment through future notice and comment rulemaking.

Comment: Several commenters voiced general concerns about the overall health equity adjustment proposal rather than specific concerns about the methodology being proposed. One commenter voiced concerns about “Advanced APMs” not receiving the health equity adjustment bonus points because the commenter believed the adjustment would be added to MIPS. Another commenter had concerns that the methodology for the adjustment could potentially worsen disparities in care. A couple of commenters encouraged CMS to take a simpler approach and risk adjust the Shared Savings Program quality measures for demographic and social risk factors. One commenter supported the goal of health equity, but recommended generally that CMS modify programs so that they better address different aspects of health equity, rather than just encouraging ACOs to serve underserved populations. Another commenter was concerned that this policy could negatively impact rural providers, citing that they see fewer patients overall than their urban counterparts due to population density.

A few commenters supported rewarding ACOs that perform highly on quality and serve underserved beneficiaries, but believed that the proposal does not create enough incentives for treating this population. One commenter further noted that the only ACOs that would benefit from the proposed adjustments are those ACOs that are below the minimum quality standard, and that ACOs with a high proportion of disadvantaged patients will have to provide additional services that would not be recouped. This commenter noted additional services would likely be needed for those patients to achieve the same quality performance as an ACO that has fewer such patients. Another commenter noted that the health equity adjustment as currently designed, which gives a maximum of 10 bonus points, is not a sufficient incentive to drive smaller, independent practices to prioritize and make investments to increase services to currently underserved populations. This commenter also cited the lag time between the time of an investment and the time at which the practice realizes any financial return, and had concerns that the return would not cover the cost of the investment in these communities, particularly given the medical complexity of patients in many underserved areas.

Response: We clarify that we interpret the comment raising concerns about Advanced APMs to refer to MIPS eligible clinicians and APM entities, because “Advanced APMs” are a type of payment model, not a type of entity participating in the Quality Payment Program. Advanced APM Shared Savings Program ACOs have to report the APP under Shared Savings Program requirements and would be eligible for the health equity adjustment added to their ACO quality performance score for purposes of determining shared savings and losses if they report eCQM/MIPS CQM all payer measures and have a proportion of assigned beneficiaries that are underserved based on the underserved multiplier definition as described in section III.G.4.b.(7)(d) of this final rule. As we noted in the proposed rule (87 FR 46141), the health equity adjustment would not impact a MIPS eligible clinician's final scores because the health equity adjusted quality performance score would be limited to the Shared Savings Program, where it would be used at the ACO level to determine an ACO's shared savings or losses. While the Shared Savings Program has made efforts to align some quality standards with MIPS ( see for example, § 425.510(b)), extending the health equity adjustment to MIPS eligible clinicians would require separate rulemaking specific to MIPS and would be outside the scope of this proposal.

As we stated in the proposed rule (87 FR 46133 and 46134), we have received suggestions from stakeholders to consider risk adjusting quality measures to account for various beneficiary characteristics that are tied to health disparities (76 FR 67873) and expressed our concern that this approach may have unintended consequences such as masking real differences in quality or setting lower quality standards for underserved populations. We believe it is more appropriate to reward high quality performance across all populations served by an ACO and apply an adjustment for those serving a high proportion of underserved individuals. Program modifications that address other aspects of health equity may be considered in the future.

We disagree with the commenters that do not believe the health equity adjustment provides incentives for treating underserved populations or voiced concern about the methodology of the health equity adjustment worsening disparities. We also disagree that ACOs that may benefit from the adjustment will not benefit financially from the additional bonus points. The proposed bonus points will reward existing high quality care to underserved populations immediately (without any lag), and these bonus points could increase in the future as ACOs improve their inclusion in care and care quality to underserved populations. While it is possible that there could be a lag between future investments to improve quality and quality score improvements, we believe this would depends on what investments the ACO makes and how those are prioritized. Furthermore, it is also not expected that these bonus points represent the sole motivation for ACOs seeking to improve quality and health equity, though as outlined in the proposed rule (87 FR 46134 and 46135) bonus points will increase the ACO's quality score used for financial reconciliation, and so could potentially impact shared savings or losses.

As we stated in the CY 2013 proposed rule (87 FR 46139 through 46141), we believe that a health equity adjustment would upwardly adjust quality performance scores for ACOs that serve a high proportion of underserved individuals and achieve high quality performance and would encourage all ACOs to treat underserved populations. We believe this because we have observed that many ACOs serving underserved beneficiaries are performing well on quality, and that serving a large proportion of underserved patients does not necessarily mean that the ACO performs worse on quality than ACOs with fewer such patients. Furthermore, when examining performance for the 12 ACOs reporting via eCQMs/MIPS CQMS, we observed that quality performance varied on different measures such that an ACO was not in the top third for all measures or the bottom third for all measures. With the move to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and our understanding of the concern voiced by the commenter, underserved populations may result in lower quality scores and this could be magnified by eCQM or MIPS CQM reporting due to all-payer data. Therefore, we believe this is a tangible incentive for ACOs to continue serving these populations and avoid delaying the switch to eCQMs or MIPS CQMs.

Small differences in quality scores can have a noticeable financial impact on an ACO. The health equity adjustment can provide ACOs up to an additional 10 points on their MIPS quality performance category score, which, when coupled with our adoption of a sliding policy for shared savings as described in section III.G.4.b.(5) of this rule, may not only assist ACOs in qualifying to earn shared savings but also enhance the rate at which ACOs qualify to share savings. We believe that limiting the health equity adjustment bonus to a maximum of 10 points creates a balanced incentive through increasing an ACO's quality performance score without dominating the score creating unintended incentives while also aligning with the scoring of the required measures under the APP, as previous bonuses within the MIPS program have not exceeded 10 points. Improving care to underserved populations will not only increase an ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points but also their overall quality score which in turn will help with shared savings and shared losses. We intend to closely monitor the impacts of the health equity adjustment and make refinements as needed during subsequent rulemaking; however, we remind readers that the heath equity adjustment as it is currently being finalized does not decrease ACOs' quality performance scores and that ACOs can only benefit from the adjustment.

Regarding the concern that this policy could negatively impact rural providers, we believe our final decision in response to commenters to modify the underserved multiplier calculation and use National ADI, dual eligibility, and LIS in the health equity adjustment, as described in section III.G.4.b.(7)(d) of this final rule, provides opportunity for all providers, whether located in rural or urban areas. In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46138), we requested comment on the addition of LIS in calculating the underserved multiplier and received many comments in support of this modification. We will be closely monitoring the impacts of the policy in rural areas and make refinements as needed in future rulemaking.

Comment: Many commenters recommended that CMS apply the health equity adjustment to all ACOs, including those that report via the CMS Web Interface, rather than only those reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. A couple of these commenters noted this would ensure the proposal has the intended effects of encouraging participation in the Shared Savings Program and advancing health equity. A few others noted that all ACOs could benefit from this proposal given that quality performance includes two claim-based measures which are all-Medicare populations. One commenter mentioned that some ACOs may be working toward improving health equity in their attributed population, but will not be recognized or rewarded for this work until they are reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. Another commenter stated that the adjustment being available to all ACOs would boost CMS's goal of 100 percent of all Medicare patients to eventually be in an “accountable relationship”.

Many commenters voiced concerns that restricting the policy to just those ACOs that report via eCQMs/MIPS CQMs does not align with the intent of the proposal and will limit who qualifies for the adjustment, noting that ACO populations do not differ based on reporting mechanism and some ACOs that could benefit most may be excluded. One commenter believed that incentivizing caring for structurally marginalized communities does not and should not depend on the data reporting mechanism and another commenter suggested that this conditional approach to the adjustment may result in unintended consequences because the bonus will not fall equally across participants in the ACO program. Many commenters were concerned that it is difficult for ACOs that serve areas of high disadvantage to participate in existing more sustainable payment models thus creating a gap between those who can and cannot transition out of FFS.

Several commenters understood that we want to find ways to incentivize ACOs to adopt eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting before it becomes mandatory in PY 2025, but believed tying this to the health equity adjustment was inappropriate and misguided. Commenters noted that ACOs continue to face challenges with the new quality reporting requirement, including challenges with upgrading systems, and that ACOs that serve a high proportion of underserved beneficiaries may have higher costs caring for these patients and thus may be additionally challenged to devote resources to invest in their health IT infrastructure. Many commenters were concerned that few ACOs will qualify for the adjustment, at least in the early years, thus limiting its usefulness and urged us to remove the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting requirement and consider policies in which all types of practices and ACOs have viable opportunities to transition to a more sustainable payment model to promoting a more equitable health system.

Response: We understand the concerns raised by commenters regarding the eCQMs/MIPS CQMs reporting criteria for being eligible to receive a health equity adjustment. However, we reiterate what we stated in the proposed rule, that the health equity adjustment is designed to upwardly adjust the ACO's quality performance score and will not financially penalize ACOs that are not eligible for the adjustment such as those who do not report using eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. Furthermore, the proposal had several goals and while commenters noted the goal of rewarding ACOs serving a high proportion of underserved individuals when high quality is achieved, another goal of the proposal design was to support these ACOs during the transition to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. ACOs that serve a higher proportion of Medicaid enrollees may receive lower quality scores during the switch to all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs without an adjustment or could be incentivized to avoid underserved populations, delay switching to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs for as long as possible, or even cease participation in the Shared Savings Program altogether.

As the transition to reporting all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs continues, with this reporting mechanism becoming mandatory starting in PY 2025, this proposal would reinforce the timeline while supporting ACOs that may be experiencing challenges with the new quality reporting requirement and providing an incentive for ACOs not to seek to avoid underserved populations during the transition to reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. Based on the all-payer quality data reported via eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in PY 2021, we observed that, as an example, one ACO would have received 6 out of the 10 maximum bonus points which would have increased its final quality performance category score to a level that would be comparable to the scores of ACOs reporting via the CMS Web Interface. We believe this demonstrates that the health equity adjustment can assist with the transition to all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and want to reinforce that this adjustment is a development opportunity for ACOs to serve a higher proportion of underserved beneficiaries, to improve on quality measures, and to move to all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. Therefore, we will not modify our proposal and apply the health equity adjustment to ACOs that report via the CMS Web Interface. When all ACOs have transitioned to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs by PY 2025, all ACOs will receive a health equity adjustment to their MIPS quality performance category score if they meet the other eligibility criteria.

(b) Application of the Adjustment

We proposed to apply the health equity adjustment in the form of bonus points added to the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score. Under the proposed approach, the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score would be the sum of the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score for all measures in the APP measure set and the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points, if applicable (87 FR 46134 and 46135). The proposal would not change the current policy for determining and calculating an ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score.

Under the existing regulations at § 425.512 and under the proposed modifications to the quality performance standard described in the proposed rule, there are specific programmatic uses of the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score. In applying the proposed health equity adjustment to the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score, which constitutes the ACO's aggregate, or overall score, across the APP measure set, we proposed to limit the application of the health equity adjustment to certain specified Shared Savings Program determinations and calculations. The use of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score in these calculations would allow ACOs that report the eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and provide high quality care to underserved beneficiaries to share in savings at relatively higher sharing rates, or in the case of ENHANCED track ACOs that owe shared losses, to reduce the shared loss rate used to calculate the amount of shared losses owed to CMS. We noted in the proposed rule that we believe this approach would serve as a means to incentivize ACOs by offering a financial reward for providing high quality care to underserved beneficiaries, further financially support ACOs that serve underserved beneficiaries, encourage ACOs to add ACO participants in underserved areas, and avoid creating adverse incentives for ACOs to avoid underserved populations or the health care providers serving those populations.

We proposed to apply an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score in determining whether the ACO met the quality performance standard set at the 30th percentile for PY 2023 as specified under § 425.512(a)(4)(i)(A), or the 40th percentile for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years, as specified in the proposed revised regulations at § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)( 1 ) and (a)(5)(i)(B), respectively (87 FR 46448). Use of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score in making this determination would potentially allow more ACOs that provide high quality care to underserved beneficiaries to meet the quality performance standard. Under the Shared Savings Program's current policies, ACOs that meet this quality performance standard share in any savings generated at the maximum sharing rate under their track (or payment model within a track), up to the performance payment limit. For ENHANCED track ACOs that meet the quality performance standard, the ACO's shared losses are scaled based on its quality performance.

We further proposed to apply an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score in the determining shared savings and losses as specified in certain existing provisions of the Shared Savings Program regulations and under proposed modifications to the regulations as described elsewhere within the proposed rule (87 FR 46439).

We proposed to use an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score to determine the final sharing rate for calculating shared savings payments under the BASIC track (under § 425.605(d)) and the ENHANCED track (under § 425.610(d)) for an ACO that meets the proposed alternative quality performance standard allowing for application of a sliding scale based on quality performance, as specified in proposed modifications to § 425.512(a)(4)(ii) and (a)(5)(ii) (87 FR 46448). Among ACOs whose shared savings would be determined according to the sliding scale approach (described in sections III.G.4.b.(2) and (3) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46129 through 46131)), the application of the proposed health equity adjustment would allow for relatively higher quality performance scores in calculating the final sharing rate and make it possible for an ACO to share in savings at a relatively higher final sharing rate under its track (or payment model within a track).

For ENHANCED track ACOs that owe shared losses, we proposed to apply the health equity adjustment to the ACO's quality performance score used in calculating the ACO's shared loss rate, to allow the ACO to share in losses at a relatively lower rate, based on its quality performance. Specifically, we proposed to use an ENHANCED track ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score in calculating shared losses under § 425.610(f) when the ACO meets the quality performance standard specified under § 425.512(a)(4)(i) or (a)(5)(i) (which includes the incentive for reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs for PY 2023 and the extension of the incentive for PY 2024, as proposed) or meets the proposed alternative quality performance standard under § 425.512(a)(4)(ii) and (a)(5)(ii) allowing for the application of a sliding scale based on quality performance (87 FR 46448). For an ENHANCED track ACO in the first performance year of its first agreement period that meets the quality performance standard by reporting data via the APP and meeting the data completeness and case minimum requirements in accordance with § 425.512(a)(2), the ACO's quality performance score is utilized in calculating any shared losses under § 425.610(f). Therefore, we also proposed to use the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score to determine the shared loss rate for such ACOs.

Further, we proposed to apply the health equity adjustment in calculating the ACO's quality performance score for an ACO affected by extreme and uncontrollable circumstances if the ACO is able to report quality data via the APP and meet data completeness and case minimum requirements, as provided in § 425.512(b)(3) in the current regulations. As discussed in section III.G.4.b.(8) of the proposed rule (87 FR 46142 through 46143), the proposed approach of using an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score to determine the “higher of” score under the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy would have no practical impact on the sharing rate for an ACO that is eligible to share in savings. For an ACO participating in the ENHANCED track that is liable for shared losses, the proposed application of the health equity adjustment could increase the ACO's quality performance score used to determine the ACO's shared loss rate, and thus potentially reduce the amount of shared losses owed to CMS.

We received one public comment on the proposed application of the health equity adjustment to the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score and provide this comment and our response below.

Comment: One commenter supported our proposed approach to apply the health equity adjustment bonus points to ACOs' MIPS Quality performance category scores, and specifically stated they support maintaining the original score and then transparently adding the points awarded from the health equity adjustment.

Response: We agree that transparency is important for any bonus points or other adjustments to an ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score because this provides information to support ACOs' ability to improve on the adjustment such as whether they received the health equity adjustment bonus and how many bonus points were applied. We are finalizing as proposed our approach to apply any bonus points an ACO received for a given performance year to the ACO's MIPS quality performance category score.

(c) Identifying Top Quality Performance Among ACOs Reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs; Determining the Measure Performance Scaler

We proposed the health equity adjustment would be available to an ACO that reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in the APP measure set and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and administers the CAHPS for MIPS survey.

We noted that we believe that limiting the proposed health equity adjustment to ACOs reporting all-payer measures (eCQMs/MIPS CQMs) would further encourage ACOs to report all-payer measures in PY 2023 (while the Web Interface is still an available reporting option) (87 FR 46132 through 46134). ACOs may opt to report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in order to have the benefit of the application of the health equity adjustment. As stated previously, the concern about lower quality scores for underserved populations is magnified in eCQMs/MIPS CQMs compared to reporting via the CMS Web Interface, because all-payer reporting in eCQMs/MIPS CQMs includes quality scores for people with Medicaid (correlating with low levels of income and increased prevalence social risk factors when compared to people with Medicare). In addition, offering a health equity adjustment to ACOs that report all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs would support ACOs that are serving greater proportions of underserved populations as the shift to all-payer reporting takes place. ACOs not yet familiar with their performance on these measures or how they may be impacted by the change to all-payer populations may be incentivized by the proposal to begin reporting these measures before the full transition occurs.

The proposal takes into account interested parties' concerns regarding challenges in improving quality of care for underserved populations, while recognizing ACOs that provide high quality of care for this population. The proposal also helps address the concerns that we have heard from ACOs that serve higher proportions of people with Medicaid and other underserved populations with regards to all-payer quality reporting during the switch to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. As we also noted in the proposed rule, social risk factors may adversely affect access to health care services or preferred health outcomes, and dual-enrollment status is a strong predictor of poorer health care quality measure outcomes in Medicare's VBP programs. We acknowledged that using the all-payer quality measures, as well as outcome measures may make it even more difficult for ACOs that serve underserved populations to achieve the quality performance standard, since all-payer reporting will newly include people with Medicaid as part of quality reporting, and people with Medicaid tend to have a higher amount of social risk factors and lower quality scores. As we discussed in section III.G.4.b(2) of the proposed rule (87 FR 46129 through 46130), most ACOs are still developing strategies and workflows to combine data across EHR systems in advance of requirements to report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. Adding health equity adjustment bonus points to the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score could allow more ACOs that care for underserved populations to potentially meet the quality performance standard set at the 30th percentile (for PY 2023) or 40th percentile (for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years) across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, and therefore, support these ACOs reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs.

We proposed to consider the ACO's performance on all measures in the APP measure set in calculating the health equity adjustment (87 FR 46135 and 46136). Table 63 outlines the APP measure set for eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting for PY 2023. To determine an ACO's performance on quality for the purpose of calculating health equity adjustment bonus points, we proposed to create three groups based on measure performance (or “performance groups”): (1) a group comprised of the top third performing ACOs; (2) a group comprised of the middle third performing ACOs; and (3) a group comprised of the bottom third performing ACOs. These groups would be created for each of the six measures independently such that an ACO in the top group based on performance on one measure may be in the bottom group based on performance on another measure. Consistent with current implementation of eCQMs and MIPS CQMs, the three groups would be created by reporting mechanism so that ACOs that report eCQMs would have each measure grouped into a top, middle, and bottom third based on the performance of other ACOs that also report eCQMs. The same methodology would be used for ACOs that report the MIPS CQMs. For the CAHPS for MIPS survey and claims-based measures, ACOs would be compared to all ACOs with data on those measures (including those that reported via the Web Interface, eCQMs, or MIPS CQMs).

We proposed to assign to an ACO a value of 4 for each measure for which its performance places it in the top performance group, a value of 2 for each measure for which its performance places it in the middle performance group, and a value of 0 for each measure for which its performance places it in the bottom performance group. We would sum the values assigned to each measure in the APP measure set to determine an ACO's total assigned value, which we refer to as the ACO's “measure performance scaler.” Under this approach, an ACO could have a measure performance scaler of up to 24 if it is among the top performance group for each measure and thereby received a value of 4 for each of six measures.

As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46136), we would assign a value of 0 to a measure in certain cases when we would not evaluate the ACO's performance on a measure. For purposes of calculating the health equity adjustment, an ACO would receive 0 for a claims-based measure or an eCQM/MIPS CQM for which the ACO does not meet the case minimum requirements at § 414.1380. Similarly, an ACO would receive 0 for the CAHPS for MIPS survey in the event it does not meet the minimum sample size requirements. An ACO that cannot meet case minimum requirements or does not have a sufficient sample size to administer the CAHPS for MIPS survey would still qualify to receive the health equity adjustment bonus for those measures that were accurately and completely reported and provided the ACO met the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs.

We also considered and analyzed scaling quality performance for the bottom, middle, and top third of measure performance by different values to evaluate how these values interact with the underserved multiplier (described in detail below) to calculate ACOs' health equity adjustment bonus points. Specifically, we also analyzed assigning a value of 0, 1, and 2 for the bottom, middle, and top third of measure performance, respectively, and decided on proposing 0, 2, and 4 instead. As proposed, the scaling would allow ACOs that have high levels of an underserved multiplier and high quality performance on most or all measures to receive near or at the maximum of 10 health equity adjustment bonus points. That is, an ACO with an underserved multiplier of 0.45 (or 45 percent) that achieved a measure performance scalar of 24 would receive the maximum of 10 health equity adjustment bonus points. With the alternate scaling approach, this ACO would achieve a measure performance scalar of 12 (that is, a value of 2 for each measure in the top third × 6 measures) but would not receive the maximum of 10 health equity adjustment bonus points even though the ACO would have achieved high-quality while caring for a large proportion of underserved beneficiaries (that is, measure performance scalar of 12 × an underserved multiplier of 0.45 = 5.4 points). Thus, the proposed scaling is consistent with CMS' goal to incentivize greater inclusion of underserved populations and the delivery of high quality care.

We received several public comments on our proposal to use the measure performance scaler to identifying top quality performance among ACOs reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. The following is a summary of the comments received and our responses.

Comment: Several commenters noted concern on our proposal to use a measure performance scaler in the calculation of the health equity adjustment. A few commenters had concerns about determining an ACO's performance on quality among their underserved population using the measure performance scaler. Specifically, these commenters stated that the measure performance scaler did not achieve the goals of this proposal because using the ACO's overall quality score may not provide insight into whether the ACO provides high-quality care to underserved populations, and that an ACO may still have large disparities in its quality performance for certain groups. One commenter supported a policy where ACOs serving the highest proportion of underserved beneficiaries would receive a health equity adjustment regardless of performance, and referenced the complex patient bonus in MIPS as a similar concept.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' sharing their concerns and recommendations. However, we believe the measure performance scaler does achieve the goals of this proposal because in order for an ACO to be eligible for the health equity adjustment, at minimum 20 percent of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries must be classified as underserved as proposed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46136 through 46138). If a large proportion of an ACO's population is classified as underserved and if this subset is receiving low quality of care, then the health equity adjustment will appropriately decrease. The health equity adjustment was purposefully designed to not reward poor quality. Likewise, if the quality of care received by an ACO's underserved beneficiaries is high and if these underserved beneficiaries represent only a small proportion of an ACO's total population, then the health equity adjustment will be lower (all else being equal) as the adjustment was not designed to reward ACOs that serve a low number of underserved beneficiaries. However, we note that the adjustment does not penalize poor quality or having a low underserved population. While ACOs with an underserved beneficiary population that is less than 20 percent are not eligible for the health equity adjustment bonus, they also are not penalized by this policy. The health equity adjustment instead incentivizes ACOs to increase the number of underserved beneficiaries they serve and to improve quality of care as these are the two ways to receive more bonus points on their MIPS Quality performance category score. As we continue to examine additional data it is possible that the incorporation of beneficiary-level quality data is something we would consider for this adjustment in the future.

Comment: A few commenters were concerned about the three-tiered approach used in determining the measure performance scaler and the number of ACOs that would be awarded the maximum bonus points based on the way the scaler is designed. One commenter noted that the tiered performance category groups may create a small numbers issue, with only a few ACOs in each tier, if these groups are based on an ACO's reporting mechanism and not many ACOs are currently reporting through eCQMs. An additional commenter was concerned that ACOs serving a large proportion of underserved population may end up in the bottom third for all or most of the quality measures and earn a 0 or very low measure performance scaler. This commenter recommended we consider an approach that will support these ACOs such as providing additional guardrails to help ACOs that serve higher proportions of underserved populations avoid a score of 0 and stay motivated to continue to participate in the Shared Savings Program and encourage other Medicare providers in underserved areas to join the Shared Savings Program. Another commenter was concerned we have not provided information on the number of ACOs that would reach the maximum 10 bonus points and suggested we calibrate the measure performance scaler in such a way that results in awarding 10 bonus points to those ACOs that have a health equity adjustment in the 90th percentile among all eligible ACOs, even if they are below 10 bonus points based on the health equity adjustment calculation steps provided in the proposed rule (87 FR 46139 through 46141).

Response: We wish to re-emphasize that the goal of the proposal is to incentivize high quality care by ACOs serving a greater proportion of underserved populations. Correspondingly, the health equity adjustment bonus points are designed to award higher points for ACOs that (1) serve greater percentages of underserved populations, and (2) have higher quality performance, rather than being designed to guarantee that a certain percent of ACOs will receive the maximum number of bonus points. Based on PY 2019 Web Interface quality data, ACOs that serve a higher proportion of underserved beneficiaries have generally had similar quality performance to other ACOs, although with slightly lower scores on average. We also have observed variation across quality measures in the APP measure set within ACOs serving both high and low proportions of underserved populations, such that ACOs tend to not perform in the top or bottom across all quality measures but perform differently across quality measures. For example, we have observed that an ACO that performs well on measures related to hospitalization may or may not perform well on measures related to preventive care. While there were not many ACOs reporting eCQMs in 2021, we believe this number will increase each year and that the health equity adjustment will further incentivize ACOs to report eCQMs. We note that the tiered approach uses the entire population of ACOs for determining the top, middle, and bottom third based on performance for the CAHPS for MIPS survey and the claims-based measures avoiding small numbers issues for those measures.

Comment: A couple commenters voiced concerns specific to the complexity of the Measure Performance Scaler, noting that the Measure Performance Scaler was unnecessarily complicated and recommended simplification by using the ACO's MIPS quality performance score rather than creating a new measure of quality performance. One of these commenters requested a rationale for why the proposed approach used a new and different methodology than what is used in calculating the ACO's quality performance score. This commenter was concerned that the proposed approach could result in large changes in the ACO's scaler based on small changes in relative performance or in no change in an ACO's scaler based on large quality performance changes. As an example, the commenter noted that the tiered approach makes no distinction between an ACO with a quality score in the 67th percentile and an ACO with a quality score in the 99th percentile; both would receive 4 points on the relevant measure. Another commenter requested CMS clarify what happens when an ACO does not receive a score for a claims-based measure (for example, ACOs did not receive a score on Measure 479 because they are FQHC-only ACOs and do not have an eligible MIPS participating clinician group).

Response: While we appreciate the suggestion related to using the ACO's Quality performance category score, our goal is to focus on quality performance among ACOs, whereas the Quality performance category score incorporates other factors, such as bonus points and other scoring factors. We disagree that the Measure Performance Scaler is unnecessarily complicated and furthermore note that the Scaler is designed to consider each quality measure individually when determining the value an ACO will receive for their performance on that measure. These values are then summed to create the total Measure Performance Scaler used in the health equity adjustment calculation. This allows ACOs that perform well on some measures but not all measures to still receive bonus points if the ACO meets the criteria of having an underserved population that is 20 percent or greater (see III.G.4.b.(7)(e) of this final rule). The scaler is also designed to assess an ACO's measure performance on each quality measure against other ACOs, such that an ACO's efforts in quality performance improvement may make a difference in their tier for a given measure relative to other ACOs. The Quality performance category score, in contrast, involves comparisons to non-ACOs, whereas the health equity adjustment bonus points are meant to reward ACOs that achieve high quality performance relative to other ACOs (rather than smaller individual providers). We note that by design the health equity adjustment bonus points do not adversely impact ACOs such as they are not awarded until after the calculation of the quality performance standard, and therefore, do not raise the quality performance standard.

Finally, we note that, as described in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46135 and 46136), unscored measures are removed from the calculation of the health equity adjustment, effectively receiving a performance scaler of 0 for that measure. As mentioned in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we reserve the right to refine the methodology used to calculate the measure performance scaler or any other aspects of the health equity adjustment over time.

After reviewing the public comments and for the reasons described above and in the proposed rule (87 FR 46135 and 46136), we are finalizing the methodology of calculating the measure performance scaler as proposed.

(d) Identifying ACOs Serving High Proportions of Underserved Beneficiaries; Determining the Underserved Multiplier

Through the proposed health equity adjustment we seek to improve health equity outcomes by providing incentives to ACOs and their ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers to achieve high levels of performance on all-payer and outcome focused Medicare quality measures for underserved populations, given the concerns we have heard regarding reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, which require reporting of data on all patients and are considered all-payer measures. We proposed to award higher positive adjustments to ACOs providing higher quality of care to underserved populations, with the amount of the adjustment increasing as an ACO's proportion of underserved beneficiaries increases. Such an approach would support ACOs currently serving a high proportion of underserved individuals while also encouraging all ACOs to treat underserved populations.

We proposed to identify ACOs serving larger proportions of underserved beneficiaries, by considering the proportion of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries and the proportion of beneficiaries residing in areas of high socioeconomic disadvantage within the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary population. We proposed to calculate an “underserved multiplier” for each ACO that would be determined using the higher value of either the proportion of an ACO's assigned beneficiary population that is considered underserved based on beneficiaries who are from underserved neighborhoods, identified using ADI data, or the proportion of an ACO's assigned beneficiary population that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. As noted above, dual eligibility status and ADI are good indicators of socioeconomical disadvantages, with ADI associated with medical disparities and underservice and dual eligibility associated with beneficiary's inability to access care. We would then multiply this underserved multiplier by the aforementioned measure performance scaler to determine the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points.

We referred readers to the discussion in section III.G.2.a. of the proposed rule (87 FR 46098 through 46110) for a general description of the ADI data, including the 17 input variables from census data that make up the ADI composite measure. Each census block group's ADI score is ranked nationally, with higher national percentile ranks corresponding to more socioeconomically disadvantaged areas. Census block groups have been found to have stronger associations with hospitalization rates than larger areas used to create ADIs. 286 For each ACO, we explained that we would create an underserved multiplier that ranges from zero to one and is based on the higher value of either the proportion of the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary population residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85 or the proportion of the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiaries that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid (including dually eligible ESRD, disabled, and aged beneficiaries). 287 An ADI national percentile rank of at least 85 or above is being used as a cutoff because this is the value at which some empiric studies have demonstrated worse outcomes. In particular, one study demonstrated that 30-day rehospitalization rates did not vary significantly across the least disadvantaged 85 percent of neighborhoods, but hospitalizations within the most disadvantaged 15 percent persons increased with worsening ADI, with a pattern that was similar amongst individuals with congestive heart failure, acute myocardial infarction, and pneumonia. 288 As proposed, an ACO serving mostly beneficiaries residing in areas of high socioeconomic disadvantage or serving a larger proportion of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries would receive a multiplier value closer to one and a larger health equity adjustment to its quality performance score, all else equal. An ACO serving mostly beneficiaries from areas that are not considered to be of low socioeconomic disadvantages and serving a smaller proportion of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries would not likely receive an underserved multiplier value that meets the proposed floor of 20 percent (described in section III.G.4.b.(7)(e) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule), and therefore, would not receive health equity adjustment bonus points. Thus, the result of the underserved multiplier would be that ACOs serving a higher proportion of underserved beneficiaries would be eligible for a greater number of bonus points, assuming they achieve high quality performance. Therefore, the use of the underserved multiplier, combined with the proposed floor to receive any bonus points, is consistent with our goal of rewarding ACOs that include a higher proportion of underserved beneficiaries while delivering high quality care.

286 Maroko AR, et al., “Integrating Social Determinants of Health With Treatment and Prevention: A New Tool to Assess Local Area Deprivation.” Preventing Chronic Disease, No. 13(E128), pp.1-5, doi: 10.5888/pcd13.160221 (September 2016), available at https://www.cdc.gov/pcd/issues/2016/16_0221.htm .

287 In computing this proportion, we would use for each beneficiary the fraction of the year (referred to as person years) in which they were eligible for the aged/dual eligible enrollment type or for which they were eligible for the ESRD or disabled enrollment type and dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

288 Kind AJ, et al., “Neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage and 30-day rehospitalization: a retrospective cohort study.” Annals of Internal Medicine. No. 161(11), pp 765-74, doi: 10.7326/M13-2946 (December 2, 2014), available at https://www.acpjournals.org/doi/epdf/10.7326/M13-2946 .

The proposed use of ADI and Medicare and Medicaid dual eligibility status to assess underserved populations in the health equity adjustment allows CMS to consider both broader neighborhood level characteristics and individual characteristics among CMS beneficiaries. As discussed in the proposed rule, we proposed to use ADI and dual eligibility status to determine levels of quarterly AIPs for eligible Shared Savings Program ACOs (see section III.G.2.a. of the proposed rule (87 FR 46098 through 46110)). These two factors reflect different types of characteristics, which may relate to patient populations differently. An ADI is a multidimensional evaluation of the socioeconomic characteristics of the neighborhoods the beneficiaries live in, and incorporates domains such as education, income, employment, housing, and household characteristics. It also reflects neighborhood factors that may influence health, health care, and care delivery regardless of individual circumstance. Dual Medicare and Medicaid eligibility status is a direct measure of the beneficiary, reflecting their individual income status, and has been shown to be a predictor of worse health outcomes. While there is some overlap between ADI and dual eligibility, we proposed to utilize both because they can be used to identify complementary populations that may not be fully recognized using only one of the factors, by taking the higher of the ACO's proportion of assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85 or the ACO's proportion assigned beneficiaries that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, to determine an ACO's underserved multiplier for calculating health equity adjustment bonus points. Our proposal for the underserved multiplier used for calculating the health equity adjustment and our proposal for calculating quarterly AIPs are directionally aligned in that they both seek to provide greater benefit to ACOs that are serving underserved populations. For the health equity adjustment, we noted that we believe use of ACO-level indicators (that is, the proportion of the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85 or the proportion that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid) to measure the extent to which an ACO serves underserved populations is preferred to an approach that would establish an underserved multiplier at the beneficiary-level. We also noted that we believe it would be appropriate to apply an ACO-level underserved multiplier to the measure performance scaler, which would be determined based on ACO-level performance on the measures in the APP measure set. This would allow for alignment between the underserved multiplier and the measure performance scaler to which it is being applied.

Our proposal to use a “higher of” either the proportion of an ACO's assigned population residing in census block groups 289 with high ADI or the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid to calculate the underserved multiplier is intended to avoid double-counting overlapping beneficiaries (as could happen when taking the sum of the two proportions), while also allowing an ACO alternate ways to achieve a higher multiplier value, recognizing that no single value would fully represent its population.

289 We note that in the proposed rule we inadvertently referred to census blocks rather than census block groups when describing this proposal at 87 FR 46137.

We also noted that this approach to determining the underserved multiplier based on the ACO's assigned population is a means of approximating the extent to which the ACO and its ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers are serving underserved beneficiaries. The ADI component of the underserved multiplier would be based on the neighborhood level characteristics among ACO assigned beneficiaries, and these characteristics may generally reflect the social determinants of health in the communities served by the ACO and thus serve as a proxy for the all payer population characteristics and their neighborhoods. The use of dual Medicare and Medicaid eligibility is based on the status of beneficiaries attributed to the ACO.

Although we proposed to determine the underserved multiplier as the higher of two characteristics—the proportion of assigned beneficiaries residing in areas of high socioeconomic disadvantage or the proportion of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid assigned beneficiaries—we explained that we considered an alternative approach that would use a combination of these characteristics in calculating the underserved multiplier (87 FR 46136 through 46138). Together these characteristics may be complementary in identifying an ACO's underserved populations, one based on neighborhood characteristics and the other based on dual eligibility status among the ACO's assigned beneficiaries. However, while the two characteristics allow for recognition of the ACO's underserved population at the neighborhood and beneficiary levels, there is potential overlap and thus double-counting with the approach to combine (sum) these characteristics. We sought comment on this alternative approach to calculating the underserved multiplier as the sum of an ACO's proportion of assigned beneficiaries residing in areas of high socioeconomic disadvantage and an ACO's proportion of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid assigned beneficiaries. We noted that such an approach would result in a potentially higher underserved multiplier for ACOs, and thereby higher total health equity adjustment bonus points compared to the proposed approach. As a result, under this alternative calculation of the underserved multiplier, more ACOs would likely achieve the maximum of 10 bonus points.

More generally, we noted that CMS is considering similar methodologies for determining underserved populations outside of the Shared Savings Program. For example, as discussed in the Announcement of Calendar Year (CY) 2023 Medicare Advantage (MA) Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment Policies, 290 we noted that we are developing a health equity index as a potential methodological enhancement to the Part C and Part D Star Ratings that would summarize performance among groups with social risk factors across multiple measures into a single score. The goal of this health equity index would be to advance equity and support underserved communities by incentivizing contracts to perform well serving enrollees with social risk factors such as low-income subsidy (LIS)/dual eligibility and disability.

290 Available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2023-announcement.pdf . See for example the discussion of Health Equity Index (Part C and D) on pages 101-103.

As discussed in the proposed rule, we also considered alternative approaches for calculating the underserved multiplier that would additionally consider whether an ACO's assigned beneficiaries receive the LIS available under the Medicare Part D prescription drug program. LIS, as an indicator, may capture a different group of low-income beneficiaries than dual eligibility status and the eligibility criteria for LIS does not vary by State. Specifically, we explained that we considered alternatives under which we would use the LIS indicator in place of, or in addition to, a beneficiary's dual Medicare and Medicaid enrollment status. We also considered using the higher of three factors based on the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary population: (1) the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85; (2) the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid; or (3) the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries receiving LIS. We sought comment on these alternative approaches, or other approaches, to incorporating assigned beneficiaries' LIS status into the underserved multiplier.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposal to create an underserved multiplier to identifying ACOs serving high proportions of underserved beneficiaries and our responses.

Comment: Many commenters supported the underserved multiplier which will be used to identify ACOs serving a high proportion of underserved beneficiaries and including how the proportion is calculated for the purpose of the health equity adjustment calculation. Supportive commenters stated that the underserved multiplier should comprehensively represent the underserved assigned beneficiaries for each ACO, appreciated the inclusion of dual eligibility, valued that the multiplier used neighborhood-level metrics in assessing social risk, and stated it was “a step in the right direction.” One commenter also agreed that the program should account for differences in the providers' patient populations to counter the disadvantages they could face in achieving good outcomes. One commenter specifically asked us to define the criteria for “providing care for a higher proportion of underserved or dually eligible beneficiaries.”

Numerous commenters voiced their support for adding the Part D low-income subsidy to the calculation of the underserved multiplier and stated that they support a national eligibility criterion being included and that multiple approaches in capturing risk are more sensitive and appropriate. One commenter supported our proposal to use the higher of either dual eligibility or ADI 85 and above approach in calculating an ACO's underserved multiplier. One commenter supported our proposal to use a threshold of 85th percentile of ADI, stating this approach is consistent with the literature reporting that health systems caring for the most vulnerable beneficiary populations were more likely to be financially penalized under prior programs.

Response: We agree that dual eligibility and neighborhood-level deprivation are valuable measures for capturing an ACO's underserved population. We appreciate support for the proposal as outlined in the proposed rule, specifically backing the use of ADI, a threshold of 85th percentile, and using the higher of approach when calculating the underserved multiplier. In response to the commenters who requested additional details about the calculation of the health equity adjustment, we refer these commenters to the details provided in the proposed rule (87 FR 46139 through 46141), which included an outline of the steps involved in the calculation and provided several examples.

Comment: A couple commenters suggested we consider criteria beyond those we listed in the proposed rule, such as defining essential hospitals, and including this status when calculating the underserved multiplier or considering a factor that would account for serving beneficiaries in noncore rural areas. Other commenters in support of the proposal recommended CMS consider the underserved multiplier being a combination of the criteria we finalize (that is, dual eligibility, ADI 85 and above, and LIS) to allow for the most sensitive capture of high social risk and to allow more ACOs to qualify for the adjustment. Other commenters supported using ADI but recommended we evaluate whether ADI is the appropriate measurement to differentiate by regional populations; they recommended we incorporate both national and State percentiles in the ADI definition, and assess whether the 85th percentile nationally is too high for ACOs to meaningfully benefit from the adjustment. Another supportive commenter recommended a blended approach to ADI that incorporated the CDC's Social Vulnerability Index (SVI) into a single composite value of social need at the census block group level to generate a more accurate approach to the regional aspect of the underserved multiplier.

Response: We understand that some commenters prefer we combine the different criteria for defining underserved, rather than taking the higher of, to be more sensitive to capturing high social risk and allow for more ACOs to qualify for the adjustment. We appreciate these comments; however, our proposal to use the higher of approach, which uses either the proportion of an ACO's assigned population residing in census block groups with high ADI or the proportion of an ACO's assigned population that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, is intended to avoid double-counting overlapping beneficiaries which can happen when taking the sum of two proportions. This higher of approach, however, allows ACOs an alternate way to achieve a higher multiplier value while being more accurate since it does not duplicate beneficiaries in the calculation of the proportion of an ACO's assigned population who are underserved. The addition of LIS in the calculation of the underserved multiplier, which has high overlap with dual eligibility, further supports our using the higher of approach rather than summing the proportions.

We acknowledge that a few commenters in support of our using ADI in the calculation of the underserved multiplier still provided recommendations including that we perform additional evaluations on this metric, consider both national and State percentiles, and assess the threshold of 85th percentile of ADI. We confirm that we considered and assessed different methods of ADI including both national and State percentiles and various thresholds, and we believe these analyses supported our proposed approach to use national ADI percentages and an 85th percentile threshold. Additional discussion of this decision is described in the next comment summary and responses in this section of the final rule. Regarding the commenter who requested us to define the criteria for providing care for a higher proportion of underserved or dually eligible beneficiaries, we refer this commenter to section III.G.4.b.7.d of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46136 through 46138) that outlines how we plan to identify ACOs serving high proportions of underserved beneficiaries and determine the underserved multiplier used to calculate the health equity adjustment. Furthermore, given the overwhelming support and feedback we received from commenters on the inclusion of the Part D LIS in the underserved multiplier, we are finalizing the proposal with modification to incorporate LIS in the calculation of the health equity adjustment. Thus, the underserved multiplier will be determined based on the higher of: (1) the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85; or (2) the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries that are enrolled in LIS or are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. As commenters noted, LIS is a national measure and capturing individuals receiving a Part D LIS subsidy who are at risk of being underserved and, combined with the other measures of underserved, will be a more sensitive approach.

We appreciate commenters recommendations for other underserved criteria such as developing ways to capture essential hospitals or noncore rural areas, or to incorporate the CDC's Social Vulnerability Index (SVI) with ADI into a single composite measure. We will take these into consideration as we work to refine the health equity adjustment over time.

Comment: Many commenters had concerns about the approach we proposed for the underserved multiplier which defined the ACO's underserved population for the purposes of the health equity adjustment. Most of these commenters' concerns were regarding the use of ADI to identify areas of disadvantage among different geographic regions of the country and did not support our proposal to use ADI. Concerns included how ADI may not consistently identify disadvantaged areas for all types of communities, that we should consider ADI rankings at the regional or local levels instead of national rankings or develop a blend of a national and State ADI, and that ADI is heavily weighted toward factors that related to income and home values and not other variables that impact disadvantage. Rationales for these concerns included the differences in cost of living throughout the country, that ADI underestimates the vulnerabilities of neighborhoods with the highest burden of chronic disease and lowest life expectancy, and that studies have found higher correlations between disadvantage and health outcomes when using the most local ADI metrics.

One commenter noted that there may not be a single metric to accurately identify underserved communities given the variability in different areas of the country, and several commenters believed the current calculation poorly represents rural communities. These commenters requested we consider a different metric be used specifically for rural versus urban areas. Two commenters recommended that the cutoff of the 85th or higher percentile for ADI should be modified by summing the ADI percentiles for the neighborhoods of each patient assigned to the ACO, with one of these commenters further suggesting that cutoffs should not be set until there is evidence to demonstrate this would accurately capture individuals residing in disadvantaged neighborhoods.

Other comments around the underserved multiplier included concern that an ACO's underserved community was being based only on the ACO's attributed Medicare population and not the broader population served by the ACO, and that dual eligibility will vary across states. Several commenters suggested we use an alternative such as life expectancy when calculating the underserved multiplier. Other commenters requested we utilize publicly available data sets since ACOs may have limited capacity in data analytic capabilities and being able to identify which of their beneficiaries are underserved. A couple commenters requested we continue refining and testing ADI along with alternative measures of high deprivation areas before settling on a definition of the underserved multiplier.

Though the commenters summarized here were generally opposed to our approach to the underserved multiplier, several agreed with the use of Part D LIS data as either a replacement or a supplement for the dual eligibility status and ADI given LIS eligibility is uniform nationwide. A couple commenters supported the idea to combine dual eligibility status and ADI rather than only taking the higher of the two proportions when calculating the underserved multiplier.

Response: We agree with the commenters that low-income subsidy status is a more standardized measure of low income among the Medicare FFS population. We note that the Part D LIS has certain limitations. For example, all beneficiaries with dual eligibility status or who receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI) automatically receive the LIS designation in CMS data systems. LIS designation means that the beneficiary is enrolled in the Medicare Part D low-income subsidy. Beneficiaries who do not have dual eligibility status or SSI status but whose income is lower than 150 percent of the Federal poverty level must apply for LIS. Our analysis finds that the vast majority of Medicare beneficiaries with the LIS designation are those who automatically receive this designation, rather than those who applied for the benefit and were approved. Nonetheless, despite this limitation we agree that the use of the LIS designation, in addition to dual eligibility status, is preferable to using dually eligible status alone, as doing so reduces variability across States while moderately expanding the number of beneficiaries we will identify as low income. Furthermore, we note that including LIS in the calculation of the underserved multiplier provides ACOs with an incentive to support eligible beneficiaries who must apply for the benefit to make the connection.

We also acknowledge commenters' concerns that ADI may not accurately identify areas of disadvantage among different geographic regions of the country. As noted in the Advance Investment Payment, III.G.2.a.(5), section of this final rule, ASPE recently conducted an environmental scan and concluded that none of the existing area-level indices are ideal; they concluded that the ADI or Social Deprivation Index (SDI) were the best available choices when selecting an index for addressing Health Related Social Needs or Social Determinants of Health for immediate policy development. 291 After additional consideration and review, we believe the ADI national percentile rank remains one of the best available options to assess underserved populations in the health equity adjustment because it was developed with the goal of quantifying and comparing social disadvantage across geographic neighborhoods and uses a combination of 17 different input variables from census data in the calculation. One key strength we see with ADI is that it is a comprehensive, publicly available dataset that applies a standardized score for all census block groups nationwide. Details about the ADI score and its calculation can be found in section III.G.2.a.(5) of the proposed rule.

291 Report: “Landscape of Area-Level Deprivation Measures and Other Approaches to Account for Social Risk and Social Determinants of Health in Health Care Payments.” Accessed at https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/area-level-measures-account-sdoh on September 27, 2022.

Regarding comments that suggested we continue to refine and test ADI before establishing cutoffs and settling on a definition of the underserved multiplier, as we stated in the proposed rule (87 FR 46135 through 46138) we believe the current approach supports our preliminary efforts to address health disparities and close the performance gap on the quality of care provided to underserved populations served by ACOs through incentives and upwardly adjusts an ACO's quality performance score with no penalties to those ACOs that do not qualify for the adjustment. We wish to remind commenters of our intent to monitor the impact of the adjustment as necessary and consider modifications to the design of the health equity adjustment through future notice and comment rulemaking. We also appreciate commenters recommendations for incorporating other underserved criteria such as life expectancy and rural versus urban indicators. We will take these into consideration as we work to refine the health equity adjustment over time.

After consideration of the public comments, including their support for the use of Part D LIS in the calculation of the underserved multiplier, and for the reasons stated earlier in this section and in the proposed rule (87 FR 46136 through 46138), we are finalizing our proposal with a modification to use enrollment in the LIS in addition to dual eligibility and ADI in the calculation of the underserved multiplier. As commenters noted, the criteria for LIS enrollment are consistent nationwide and including multiple factors when capturing individuals at risk of being underserved will be a more sensitive approach. We believe the addition of LIS will establish criteria that are more uniform nationwide such that eligibility for the subsidy is the same regardless of geographic differences.

(e) Determining the Health Equity Adjustment Bonus Points an ACO Is Eligible To Receive Based on the ACO's Measure Performance Scaler and Underserved Multiplier

We proposed the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points would be calculated by multiplying the measure performance scaler and the ACO's underserved multiplier. However, we also proposed to impose a number of limitations on the availability of and the amount of the health equity adjustment bonus points.

We proposed that ACOs would be ineligible to receive any bonus points if their underserved multiplier is less than 20 percent, thereby establishing a “floor” on the size of the ACO's underserved population under the health equity adjustment. Imposing a floor of 20 percent for the underserved multiplier, for an ACO to be eligible to receive bonus points, reinforces that the health equity adjustment is intended to reward ACOs that are serving higher proportions of underserved beneficiaries while also achieving high levels of quality performance. We explained that we believe this approach is necessary to remain consistent with the goal to reward and incentivize care for these populations. Absent such a floor, ACOs that perform well on quality measures but serve relatively small populations of underserved beneficiaries would be further rewarded, which could create incentives that are inconsistent with the purpose of the health equity adjustment. We anticipate the percent of ACOs meeting the 20 percent floor for the underserved multiplier would increase over time, as existing ACOs seek to expand their reach into underserved communities, and as a result of the proposed new participation options that are designed to foster greater entry into the Shared Savings Program by ACOs that serve underserved communities. For example, among ACOs receiving the proposed AIPs, the amount of the quarterly payments would increase as beneficiaries' risk factors-based scores increase (set to 100 if the beneficiary is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, or set to the ADI national percentile rank of the beneficiary's census block group if the beneficiary is not dually eligible). ACOs receiving AIPs that expand the size of their underserved populations would thereby receive higher amounts of quarterly AIPs to build their care coordination capabilities (including coordination with community-based organizations, as appropriate), address specific health disparities, and meet other proposed criteria for use of the funds (as described in section III.G.2.a. of the proposed rule (87 FR 46098 through 46110)). Under the proposed health equity adjustment, these ACOs would have a further incentive to deliver high quality of care and thereby perform well on the APP measure set for eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting.

We proposed the number of health equity adjustment bonus points to be awarded would not exceed a maximum of 10 points. We explained that we believe that limiting the health equity adjustment bonus to a maximum of 10 points strikes a balance between creating an incentive for ACOs to report eCQM/MIPS CQM measures and rewarding ACOs that are high performing on quality and serve higher proportions of underserved beneficiaries, while not overly inflating an ACO's quality performance score. Further, allocating a maximum of 10 points for this bonus would align with the scoring of the required measures under the APP. Previous bonuses within the MIPS program have not exceeded 10 points or been higher than 10 percent of the score the bonus aligns with. 292 293

292 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), “Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) Scoring Guide for the 2020 Performance Year,” Quality Payment Program, Updated May 20, 2021, https://qpp-cm-prod-content.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/1201/2020%20MIPS%20Scoring%20User%20Guide.pdf . 293 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), “Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) Traditional MIPS Scoring Guide for the 2021 Performance Year,” Quality Payment Program, Updated April 25, 2022, https://qpp-cm-prod-content.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/1527/2021%20Traditional%20MIP%20Scoring%20SGuide.pdf .

We further proposed that the bonus points would be added to the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score, with the sum capped at 100 percent. As proposed, the cap at 100 percent would ensure that the application of the health equity adjustment does not cause the ACO's quality performance score to exceed the maximum possible quality performance score an ACO could achieve absent the adjustment. Thus, the proposed cap would align with the current practice which sets the maximum quality performance score at 100 percent.

The health equity adjustment bonus points would be added to the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score for the purpose of determining whether the ACO meets the quality performance standard for a given performance year by meeting or exceeding the applicable MIPS Quality performance category score percentile and, if applicable, in determining the ACO's final sharing rate or shared loss rate. We noted that this proposal to adopt a health equity adjustment would not impact the calculation of the quality performance standard itself. That is, the required percentile (30th for PY 2023 and 40th for subsequent performance years) would continue to be determined across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, and would not reflect any health equity bonus points earned by Shared Savings Program ACOs.

Further, as described in section III.G.4.b.(2) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46129 through 46130), under the proposed sliding scale approach for determining shared savings, we would calculate an ACO's final sharing rate as the product of the maximum sharing rate under the ACO's track (or payment model within a track) and the ACO's quality performance score (inclusive of any applicable health equity adjustment bonus points). Similarly, as described in section III.G.4.b.(3) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46130 through 46131), under the proposed modifications to the approach to calculating scaled shared losses for ENHANCED track ACOs, we would calculate an ACO's shared loss rate as 1 minus the product of 75 percent and the ACO's quality performance score (inclusive of any applicable health equity adjustment bonus points), not to exceed 75 percent and not to be less than 40 percent. The proposed cap of 100 percent on the sum of the ACO's MIPS quality performance category score and health equity adjustment bonus points would allow for clarity and consistency in the calculation of the final sharing rates under the proposed sliding scale approach, and for the calculation of the shared loss rate for ENHANCED track ACOs.

Accordingly, as proposed, the health equity adjustment would enable more ACOs that serve underserved populations and provide high quality care to share in a portion of the savings that they generate as the addition of the proposed health equity adjustment bonus points should allow more ACOs to meet the quality performance standard by meeting or exceeding the applicable MIPS quality performance category score percentile for a given performance year (that is, 30th percentile for PY 2023, and 40th percentile thereafter). For ACOs that meet the proposed alternative quality performance standard described in section III.G.4.b. of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, the addition of health equity adjustment bonus points to the ACO's quality performance score could increase the final sharing rate used to calculate the ACO's shared savings payment. Finally, for ACOs participating in the ENHANCED track that owe shared losses, the addition of health equity adjustment bonus points could reduce the shared loss rate used to calculate the amount of shared losses owed to CMS.

The combination of the measure performance scaler, based on an ACO's performance on different quality measures, and the underserved multiplier, based on an ACO's unique assigned beneficiary population, results in a range of possible health equity adjustment bonus points that is designed to give the highest rewards to ACOs caring for a disproportionate share of underserved individuals and delivering high quality care. Through the proposed health equity adjustment, ACOs that perform well on measures in the APP measure set for eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting and serve a large proportion of underserved individuals within their assigned beneficiary population would be more likely to receive the maximum number of 10 bonus points, and in turn could see the largest increases in their quality performance score, which in turn, would have the most significant impact on determining the rate at which the ACO shares in savings, or for ACOs under the ENHANCED track, the rate at which the ACO shares in losses. We refer readers to mathematical examples for the steps in the calculation of the health equity adjustment, described in section III.G.4.b.(7)(f) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46139 through 46141).

Based on initial modeling, approximately 30 percent of ACOs participating in PY 2020 would have had an underserved multiplier above the 20 percent floor necessary to qualify for the proposed health equity adjustment. Therefore, we noted that we believe the proposed approach could result in a significant number of ACOs earning health equity adjustment bonus points, which in turn would support these ACOs in caring for underserved populations.

Furthermore, by rewarding ACOs when high quality is achieved, the health equity adjustment could create incentives for ACOs to improve care for those who have been historically underserved. As proposed, the approach, which is designed to upwardly adjust the ACO's quality performance score, lacks additional financial penalties for ACOs that are not meeting high standards of care, which we believe is important as such a downward adjustment could worsen disparities and further jeopardize the ability of these ACOs to care for the populations they serve. We believe the proposal aligns with the broader CMS health equity goals and serves as an important step forward in advancing health equity by providing an incentive for ACOs to care for underserved populations and to provide high quality care to all of the populations they serve, rather than merely adjusting measure performance for patient risk factors.

We received several public comments on the provisions to determining the health equity adjustment bonus points an ACO is eligible to receive based on the proposed calculation. The following is a summary of the public comments and our responses.

Comment: A few commenters supported the proposed method of determining whether and how many health equity adjustment bonus points ACOs are eligible to receive, and some of these commenters had additional feedback for consideration. Two supportive commenters recommended that we consider a potential increase to the health equity adjustment bonus points to have greater and faster impact on the lives of the most at-risk beneficiaries. Another commenter in support of the proposal recommended that we delay incorporating health equity adjustment bonus points in the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score until all providers have their EHR build complete.

Several commenters opposed the maximum health equity adjustment bonus points ACOs can receive. A few commenters were concerned about the maximum being capped at 10 health equity adjustment bonus points for ACOs. Commenters noted that 10 points is not enough of a tangible incentive for ACOs. These commenters noted that the benefit of health equity adjustment bonus points would not cover the cost of investment in underserved communities, given the medical complexity of many underserved patients. Another commenter noted that the bonus points would not appropriately adjust for the quality score differences that could occur between reporting quality measures via CMS Web Interface and eCQM/MIPS CQMs when ACOs transition to all-payer eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting. One commenter noted that 10 points was not enough to make up for regional benchmarks in which ACOs tend to compete with themselves. This commenter noted that FQHCs have a Medicare population that is not representative of their overall patient or community population, and therefore, the bonus points awarded may not account for an ACO's sub-population differences. Another commenter recommended that we offer opportunities like the Medicare Advantage program's approach of 5 percent and 10 percent benchmark bonuses, and suggested Community Health Benchmark Bonuses (CHBB) for ACO's operating in high ADI communities of 5 percent more for 70-85 ADI score and 10 percent more for ADI 85-100 rather than the current bonus point design. Another commenter noted that 10 points should be the minimum, not the maximum, since they opined the proposal will drive ACOs to onboard more underserved beneficiaries but that this individual will be new to the health care system and the adjustments should counter-balance higher costs associated with care for this patient population.

Response: Regarding an increase in the 10-point maximum, we designed the health equity adjustment to strike a balance between incentivizing ACOs to report eCQM/MIPS CQM measures, rewarding ACOs that are high performing on quality and serve higher proportions of underserved beneficiaries, and avoiding overly inflating an ACO's quality performance score. Adding additional bonus points would upset this balance because it may disproportionately increase an ACO's quality performance score. Allocating a maximum of 10 points for this bonus would align with the scoring of the required measures under the APP, as previous bonuses within the MIPS program have not exceeded 10 points or been higher than 10 percent of the score the bonus aligns with.

Regarding delaying implementation of the health equity adjustment until all ACOs have completed their switch to eCQMs/MIPS CQMS, we note that ACOs that serve a higher proportion of Medicaid enrollees may receive lower quality scores during the switch to eCQMs without an adjustment because eCQMs/MIPS CQMs are all-payer measures. As we stated in the proposed rule, the incorporation of health equity adjustment bonus points in the MIPS Quality Performance category score is consistent with our goal to support ACOs in making the transition to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. In particular, the health equity adjustment may offset some or all of the reduction in quality scores experienced by ACOs as they switch to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. Furthermore, though only 12 ACOs reported via eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in PY 2021, we observed that, had the health equity adjustment been available these ACOs would have received a range of bonus points including one ACO receiving the maximum 10 bonus points added to their MIPS Quality performance category score if the health equity adjustment was already implemented. Since ACOs can only increase their MIPS Quality performance category score through the health equity adjustment and ACOs have the potential to receive a high number of bonus points, we believe this supports ACOs as they switch to all-payer reporting and will not delay implementation.

Regarding a quality differential between reporting structures for ACOs, the incorporation of health equity adjustment bonus points in the MIPS Quality Performance category score is consistent with our goal to support ACOs in making the transition to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. There is concern that an ACO may receive lower quality scores for underserved populations and that this is magnified in eCQMs/MIPS CQMs compared to reporting via the CMS Web Interface because all-payer reporting in eCQMs/MIPS CQMs includes quality scores for all people with Medicaid whereas historical reporting via the CMS Web Interface has only included those quality scores for people with Medicare and who are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. Indeed, we did observe variation in reporting between the CMS Web Interface and eCQMs/MIP CQMs across the different measures for those 12 ACOs that reported all payer data in PY 2021. Therefore, without an adjustment during the switch to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, ACOs that serve a higher proportion of people with Medicaid or other underserved populations outside of Medicare could be incentivized to avoid underserved populations, delay switching to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs for as long as possible, or even cease participation in the Shared Savings Program altogether.

Comment: Several commenters opposed our approach for determining whether an ACO is eligible for the health equity adjustment. Specifically, several commenters expressed concern that few ACOs will be able to meet the 20 percent floor since the percentage of dually eligible beneficiaries varies across States. Commenters noted issues with geographic differences such that that some regional populations may not appear underserved when comparing ACOs to the ADI national percentile rank and recommended we use LIS data as a substitute or supplement for ADI since LIS eligibility is uniform nationwide. These commenters requested that we share additional data and analysis to compare LIS and ADI by geographic region, which we discuss in section III.G.4.b.(7)(d) of this final rule.

A few commenters requested that we revise the eligibility requirements for health equity adjustment bonus points, with a couple specifically recommending that we remove the 20 percent floor requirement for the underserved multiplier. One of these commenters noted that the 20 percent floor was arbitrary such that ACOs with high quality performance but an underserved population that is 19 percent of its assigned beneficiaries would be ineligible for any health equity adjustment bonus points. This commenter suggested that the floor discourages ACOs from expanding underserved population because the shared savings payments do not cover the cost of providing high quality care to those patients. Another commenter noted that unconditional eligibility for ACOs would reduce concerns regarding the transition to eCQM reporting and provide additional resources to address unmet social needs for a Shared Savings Program participating practice's clients. A different commenter noted that the threshold for qualifying for the adjustment is slightly too high and suggested an alternative solution to increase the number of eligible ACOs: one is to lower the underserved multiplier threshold to 15 percent, which would increase the number of eligible ACOs.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' concerns and recommendations. Regarding eligibility requirements for health equity adjustment bonus points, as stated in the proposed rule (87 FR 46138 and 46139) the establishment of a “floor” for the underserved multiplier reinforces that the adjustment is intended to reward ACOs that serve higher proportions of underserved beneficiaries. We believe the proposed approach would result in a significant number of ACOs earning health equity adjustment bonus points. Based on data from PY 2021, approximately 34 percent of ACOs would have had an underserved multiplier above the 20 percent floor necessary to qualify. Therefore, we believe the proposed approach would result in a significant number of ACOs earning health equity adjustment bonus points, which in turn would support these ACOs in caring for underserved populations and support these ACOs as they transition to report eCQM/MIPS CQM measures. We also anticipate that meeting the 20 percent floor for the underserved multiplier would increase over time, as existing ACOs seek to expand their reach into underserved communities.

We address any comments about ADI, dually eligible beneficiaries, LIS or the underserved multiplier that extend beyond the 20 percent floor in section III.G.4.b.(7)(d) of this final rule.

After consideration of the public comments and for the reasons stated above and in the proposed rule (87 FR 46138 and 46139), we are finalizing as proposed the eligibility criteria for the health equity adjustment and the limits on how many bonus points can be received by any ACOs in a given performance year. Specifically, we are finalizing that an ACO will be ineligible for the health equity adjustment and subsequent bonus points if their underserved multiplier is less than 20 percent of their assigned beneficiaries. We are finalizing that the number of health equity adjustment bonus points will not exceed a maximum of 10 points. Though we did not receive comment on it, we are also finalizing that the health equity adjustment bonus points will be added to an ACOs MIPS Quality performance category score, with the sum capped at 100 points.

(f) Calculation Steps and Examples

In this section, we outline the calculation steps and provide examples of the determination of health equity adjustment bonus points and the application of these bonus points (for eligible ACOs) to an ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score. These example calculations illustrate the variability in the health equity adjustment bonus points resulting from the proposed approach, which accounts for both an ACO's quality performance and the ACO's proportion of underserved beneficiaries among its assigned beneficiary population.

Step 1: Calculate the ACO's measure performance scaler.

In the example calculation of the ACO's measure performance scaler, as shown in Table 57, ACOs with “high” measure performance have been assigned a value of four for each of the six measures in the APP measure set for having achieved performance on these measures in the top performance group (top third). ACOs with “middle” measure performance have a mix of performance in the top performance group (top third, assigned a value of four per measure) and middle performance group (middle third, assigned a value of two per measure) on the six quality measures. ACOs with “low” measure performance have a mix of performance in the middle performance group (middle third, assigned a value of two per measure), and bottom performance group (bottom third, assigned a value of zero per measure) on the six quality measures.

Step 2: Calculate the ACO's underserved multiplier .

Under the approach presented in the proposed rule and illustrated in Table 58, the underserved multiplier (column [C]) would be calculated as the higher of the proportion of the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary population residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85 (column [A]) or the proportion of the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiaries that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid (column [B]). In line with our modification to the proposed rule, we will consider the proportion of an ACO's assigned beneficiaries that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid or are enrolled in Part D LIS, or both. To be eligible for the health equity adjustment bonus points, an ACO would need to have an underserved multiplier of 20 percent (0.2) or higher.

Step 3: Calculate the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points .

As shown in Table 59, to calculate the number of health equity adjustment bonus points awarded to an ACO (column [C]), CMS would multiply an ACO's measure performance scaler (Step 1, column [A]) by the ACO's underserved multiplier (Step 2, column [B]).

Step 4: Add the health equity adjustment bonus points to the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score to calculate the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score.

As shown in Table 60, up to 10 health equity adjustment bonus points (Step 3, column [B]) would be added to the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score (column [A]), with a maximum health equity adjusted quality performance score (column [C]) of 100 percent (that is, the sum is capped at 100).

We did not receive any comments specific to the steps involved in calculating the health equity adjustment bonus points or the examples provided in the proposed rule (87 FR 46139 through 46141). Any comments related to factors involved in the health equity adjustment, including the measure performance scaler, the underserved multiplier, the eligibility criteria or bonus point maximum we have summarized and responded to elsewhere in this final rule where those factors are described and defined.

(g) Incorporating the Health Equity Adjustment Into Shared Savings Program Quality Performance Reports

In the event an ACO reports both the Web Interface measure set and the eCQM/MIPS CQM measure set, the ACO will be assigned the higher of the two quality performance scores for purposes of the MIPS quality performance category (86 FR 65259). If the addition of health equity adjustment bonus points results in the ACO's eCQM/MIPS CQM quality performance score becoming higher than the ACO's Web Interface score (even though it was initially lower), the Shared Savings Program would use the health equity adjusted eCQM/MIPS CQM quality performance score as the ACO's quality performance score. The health equity adjustment would not impact a MIPS eligible clinician's final scores because the health equity adjusted quality performance score would be limited to the Shared Savings Program, where it would be used at the ACO level to determine an ACO's shared savings or losses. Under MIPS, eligible clinicians in ACOs that report both the CMS Web Interface measures and the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs would receive the higher of either the CMS Web interface or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs based on their ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score.

As stated in the proposed rule, we plan to show the calculation of the health equity adjustment for all ACOs that report on eCQMs/MIPS CQM measures, even if the adjustment would not affect the determination of shared savings or shared losses for the ACO. These calculations would be provided to ACOs in their reconciliation reports package. For example, under § 425.512(a)(2)(ii), an ACO in the BASIC track that is participating in the first performance year of its first agreement period meets the quality performance standard if it reports quality data via the APP and meets data completeness and case minimum requirements specified for the performance year. An ACO meeting these criteria would qualify for the maximum sharing rate under the level of the BASIC track under which it is participating, regardless of the health equity adjustment. Likewise, if such an ACO was participating in a two-sided model under the BASIC track and was liable for shared losses, the ACO would be subject to a fixed 30 percent shared loss rate that would also be unaffected by the health equity adjustment. For such an ACO, the calculation and reporting of the health equity adjustment would be for purely informational purposes. This information would provide ACOs with an understanding of the proportion of underserved individuals they care for and give ACOs additional insight into this population and opportunities for improvement as they transition to all payer quality measure reporting and develop associated quality improvement strategies and initiatives.

While we received no comments explicitly addressing our proposal to include information on the health equity adjustment in the reconciliation reports package provided to ACOs, several commenters recommended that we provide more information overall to ACOs related to the adjustment. The following is a summary of the public comments and our responses.

Comment: A few commenters recommended that CMS share additional data and analysis with ACOs regarding dual eligibility status, ADI, and Part D LIS data sources, as well as the number of beneficiaries who would qualify under each metric by geographic regions. One commenter recommended that CMS work with ACOs toward quality reporting that is disaggregated across sub-populations so that implementation of any adjustment would not shield disparities and outcomes. Another commenter encouraged CMS to report ACO quality measure results that are stratified by subgroups of the underserved population. One commenter noted that quality data reporting will be essential when identifying whether the adjustment is achieving its intended aims and helping the relevant populations. A different commenter urged us to consider segmenting patient outcomes to the extent feasible by beneficiary characteristics such as race/ethnicity in addition to implementing the health equity adjustment. A final commenter recommended that CMS provide ADI data for every beneficiary when available as part of the quarterly attribution files ACOs receive.

Response: As we stated in the proposed rule (87 FR 46141 and 46142) and previously in this section of the final rule, we plan to provide ACOs with data related to their health equity adjustment. Specifically, we plan to show the calculation of the health equity adjustment in the reconciliation reports for all ACOs that report on eCQMs/MIPS CQM measures, even if the adjustment does not impact the determination of shared savings or shared losses for the ACO. Regarding the requests for additional data beyond the calculation of the health equity adjustment, we appreciate commenters' feedback and want to confirm that CMS will make available certain additional information on dual eligibility status, Part D LIS, and ADI to all ACOs on their assigned beneficiary populations under our existing data sharing regulations at 42 CFR part 425, subpart H. Specifically, in quarterly and annual reports such as the assignment list report, we will include beneficiary identifiable information on dual eligibility, ADI, and LIS status. We will also provide aggregate data, such as the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries that are dually eligible or enrolled in the LIS, and the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries with an ADI national percentile rank of 85 or above in the quarterly and annual reports. As set forth in our regulations at § 425.702(a), (c)(1)(ii)(B)(1) and (c)(1)(ii)(C), CMS shares certain aggregate reports with ACOs under specific conditions, and this information includes demographic data that represents the minimum data necessary for ACOs to conduct health care operations work, which could encompass the dual eligibility, LIS, and ADI information. We understand ACOs may need this dual eligibility, LIS, and ADI information for quality assessments and population-based activities related to improving health and coordinating care. We also believe ACOs may need this information to conduct other health care operations activities described in paragraph (1) or (2) of the definition of “health care operations” in 45 CFR 164.501, such as population-based activities relating to improving health or reducing health care costs, protocol development, case management and care coordination, and quality assessment and improvement activities. Therefore, we believe this dual eligibility, LIS, and ADI information may be made available under our existing data sharing regulations and processes. We will take commenters feedback on other types of beneficiary-level data or data stratification into consideration.

After considering the public comments, we are finalizing as proposed our proposal to provide ACOs with information on the calculation of the health equity adjustment in their reconciliation reports if they report on eCQMs/MIPS CQM measures. We also plan to make available to ACOs on a quarterly and annual basis certain beneficiary-identifiable data on dual eligibility, LIS, and ADI national percentile rank. This will enable greater transparency into the calculation of the health equity adjustment and provide ACOs with data necessary to improve quality and coordinate care, promoting high quality care for underserved populations.

(h) Modifications to the Regulations

We proposed to amend the regulation at § 425.512, which establishes the ACO quality performance standard for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2021, to include a new paragraph (b) to govern the calculation of an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score for PY 2023 and subsequent performance years, including the policies governing calculation of health equity adjustment bonus points (87 FR 46142). We also proposed to make additional conforming changes to § 425.512 to incorporate references to the health equity adjusted quality performance score, through proposed modifications to § 425.512(a)(4)(i)(A), and within proposed revisions to § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)( 1 ) and (a)(5)(i)(B) (87 FR 46142). 294

294 We note that we proposed to use the term “health equity adjusted quality performance score” uniformly in the regulation provisions enumerated in this section of the proposed rule, even in cases where an ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score is based on its reporting of the Web Interface measure set. For such ACOs, the health equity adjustment is assumed to be zero.

We proposed further technical and conforming changes to § 425.512 to redesignate existing paragraph (b) specifying the alternative approach to calculating the quality performance score for ACOs affected by extreme and uncontrollable circumstances, as a new paragraph (c). We also proposed a modification to update a cross-reference within the newly redesignated § 425.512(c) for accuracy and to revise newly redesignated § 425.512(c)(3) to specify that we would use the health equity adjusted quality performance score in determining the quality performance score for ACOs affected by extreme and uncontrollable circumstances that report quality data under the APP and meet data completeness and case minimum requirements for PY 2023 and subsequent performance years (refer to section III.G.4.b.(8) of the proposed rule).

In addition, as described in the proposed rule, we proposed to revise § 425.605 and 425.610 to specify use of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score determined in accordance with § 425.512(b) for purposes of calculating an ACO's final sharing rate based on a sliding scale. Similarly, as proposed, the modifications to § 425.610 specify use of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score determined in accordance with § 425.512(b) for purposes of calculating the ACO's shared loss rate based on a sliding scale.

As discussed in the proposed rule (87 FR 46142), we believe the health equity adjustment proposal would support ACOs transitioning to all-payer quality measure reporting, incentivize ACOs to report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, provide stronger incentives for quality improvement, and recognize high performing ACOs serving underserved populations. We sought comment on all aspects of the proposed methodology.

Given that the proposed approach, if finalized, would be the initial implementation of a health equity adjustment under the Shared Savings Program, we noted our intent to monitor the impact of the adjustment to ensure it achieves the goal of rewarding ACOs for high quality performance while caring for larger proportions of underserved beneficiaries (87 FR 46142). We stated that we would consider modifications as necessary to the design of the health equity adjustment through future notice and comment rulemaking.

The following is a summary of the remaining public comments received on the health equity adjustment proposal.

Comment: Some commenters noted the importance of quality data reporting to identify health inequity and support relevant populations. Some of these commenters encouraged CMS to provide incentives for consistent collection of data that can better identify disparities. Others recommended we identify a subset of ACO quality measures that could be stratified using this race, ethnicity and social risk factors. These commenters stated that stratifying subpopulations and incentivizing improvement based on this data could help ACOs invest in resources to make improvements.

Another commenter stated that more administrative support to ACOs in identifying and tracking performance would be needed in order for ACOs to benefit from the health equity adjustment.

One commenter also recommended we reimburse ACOs for social determinant of health screenings and utilizing z-codes. A commenter recommended that we continue to explore a full range of approaches to accounting for social needs in quality measurement, including direct risk adjustment when necessary.

One commenter suggested that we develop a longer-term equity-specific plan and explore how community organizations can also be included within broadened ACOs.

A commenter recommended that we consider requiring ACOs to apply a portion of the incentive to help build the nursing facility health-information technology infrastructure interoperability capabilities.

Response: We appreciate commenters' input on the heath equity adjustment and will take them into consideration as we continue to consider efforts to integrate health equity into the Shared Savings Program. At this time, we decline commenters' suggestions to provide additional incentives for data collection as the purpose of the health equity adjustment was not to collect additional data regarding health inequity but to reward ACOs serving a higher proportion of underserved beneficiaries while delivering high quality care. We also note that many of the commenters' alternative suggestions on how to advance health equity and account for social needs go beyond the scope of the health equity adjustment proposed in CY 2023 PFS proposed rule and we will not be addressing them in the final rule, but may be considered in future rulemaking.

In conclusion, after review of the public comments received related to the health equity adjustment and for the reasons stated above and in the proposed rule (87 FR 46132 through 46143), we are finalizing at § 425.512(b) our proposal to create the health equity adjustment with a modification to the calculation of the underserved multiplier to incorporate information on Part D LIS enrollment. Specifically, the underserved multiplier will be determined based on the higher of the proportion of assigned beneficiaries enrolled in LIS or dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, or the proportion of the ACO's beneficiaries residing in census block groups with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85. ACOs will be ineligible to receive any bonus points if their underserved multiplier is less than the “floor” of 20 percent.

We are also finalizing the creation of three groups based on measure performance to determine an ACO's performance on quality for the purpose of calculating health equity adjustment bonus points: (1) a group comprised of the top third performing ACOs; (2) a group comprised of the middle third performing ACOs; and (3) a group comprised of the bottom third performing ACOs. These groups will be created for each of the six measures independently such that an ACO in the top group based on performance on one measure may be in the bottom group based on performance on another measure. The three groups will be created by reporting mechanism so that ACOs that report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs will have each measure grouped into a top, middle, and bottom third based on the performance of other ACOs that also report eCQMs. For the CAHPS for MIPS survey and claims-based measures, ACOs will be compared to all ACOs with data on those measures.

We are also finalizing that ACOs will receive a value of four for each measure for which its performance places it in the top performance group, a value of two for each measure for which its performance places it in the middle performance group, and a value of zero for each measure for which its performance places it in the bottom performance group. The values assigned to each measure in the APP measure set will be summed to determine an ACO's total assigned value, which we refer to as the ACO's “measure performance scaler.” We are finalizing that the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points will be calculated by multiplying this measure performance scaler and the ACO's underserved multiplier.

We will assign a value of zero to a measure in certain cases when we would not evaluate the ACO's performance on a measure. For purposes of calculating the health equity adjustment, an ACO will receive zero for a claims-based measure or an eCQM/MIPS CQM for which the ACO does not meet the case minimum requirements at § 414.1380. Similarly, an ACO will receive zero for the CAHPS for MIPS survey in the event it does not meet the minimum sample size requirements. An ACO that cannot meet case minimum requirements or does not have a sufficient sample size to administer the CAHPS for MIPS survey would still qualify to receive the health equity adjustment bonus for those measures that were accurately and completely reported and provided the ACO met the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs.

We are finalizing that the health equity adjustment will be available for PY 2023 and for subsequent performance years to an ACO that reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and administers the CAHPS for MIPS survey. Such ACOs may receive up to a maximum of 10 additional points added to their MIPS Quality performance category score.

We are also finalizing that an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score will be applied in determining whether the ACO met the quality performance standard set at the 30th percentile for PY 2023 as specified under § 425.512(a)(4)(i)(A), or the 40th percentile for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years, as specified in the revised regulations at § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)(1) and (a)(5)(i)(B), respectively.

We are finalizing our proposal to apply an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score in determining shared savings and losses. Specifically, we will use an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score to determine the final sharing rate for calculating shared savings payments under the BASIC track (under § 425.605(d)) and the ENHANCED track (under § 425.610(d)) for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard allowing for application of a sliding scale based on quality performance, as specified in the revisions to § 425.512(a)(4)(ii) and (a)(5)(ii). For ENHANCED track ACOs that owe shared losses, we will apply the health equity adjustment to the ACO's quality performance score used in calculating the ACO's shared loss rate to allow the ACO to share in losses at a relatively lower rate, based on its quality performance. We will use an ENHANCED track ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score in calculating shared losses under § 425.610(f) when the ACO meets the quality performance standard specified under § 425.512(a)(4)(i) or (a)(5)(i) or meets the alternative quality performance standard under § 425.512(a)(4)(ii) and (a)(5)(ii) allowing for the application of a sliding scale based on quality performance.

We are finalizing that the health equity adjustment be applied in calculating the ACO's quality performance score for an ACO affected by extreme and uncontrollable circumstances if the ACO is able to report quality data via the APP and meet data completeness and case minimum requirements, as provided in redesignated § 425.512(c)(3).

Finally, we are finalizing our proposal to incorporate the health equity adjustment into the Shared Savings Program quality performance reports. If the addition of health equity adjustment bonus points results in the ACO's eCQM/MIPS CQM quality performance score becoming higher than the ACO's Web Interface score, the Shared Savings Program will use the health equity adjusted eCQM/MIPS CQM quality performance score as the ACO's quality performance score. We plan to show the calculation of the health equity adjustment including dual eligibility, LIS, and ADI data for all ACOs that report on eCQMs/MIPS CQM measures, even if the adjustment would not affect the determination of shared savings or shared losses for the ACO. These calculations will be provided to ACOs in their reconciliation reports package.

(8) Application of Extreme and Uncontrollable Circumstances Policy

The approach used to calculate the quality score for ACOs affected by extreme and uncontrollable circumstances (EUC) is described in § 425.512(b)(2) and (3) of the current regulations, which we proposed to redesignate as § 425.512(c)(2) and (3) (refer to section III.G.4.b.(7)(h) of the proposed rule) (87 FR 46142). In summary, under the current EUC policy, for an ACO that fails to report quality data via the APP or that reports quality data but fails to meet the data completeness or case minimum requirements applicable for the performance year, we will set the ACO's quality performance score to the equivalent of the 30th percentile (for PY 2023) or 40th percentile (for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years) across all MIPS Quality performance category scores for the relevant performance year, as described in § 425.512(b)(2). For an ACO that reports quality data via the APP and successfully meets data completeness and case minimum requirements, we will use the higher of the ACO's own health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 30th percentile (for PY 2023) or 40th percentile (for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years) across all MIPS Quality performance category scores as described in § 425.512(b)(3).

By design, any ACO that is deemed to be affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance will receive a score that is at least as high as the 30th percentile (for PY 2023) or 40th percentile (for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years) across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, thus aligning with the quality performance standard applicable for the performance year as described under § 425.512(a) in the current regulations. An ACO affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance that is eligible for shared savings (by virtue of having savings that meet or exceed its MSR) will thus receive a final sharing rate equal to the maximum sharing rate for the ACO's track (or payment model within a track) in the calculation of its shared savings amount, as described in § 425.605(d) (for ACOs participating in the BASIC track) or § 425.610(d) (for ACOs participating in the ENHANCED track). An ACO affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance participating in the ENHANCED track that is liable for shared losses (by virtue of having losses that meet or exceed its minimum loss rate) will face a shared loss rate that considers the ACO's quality performance as described in § 425.610(f).

An ACO that is determined to have been affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance and is eligible for shared savings would already receive the maximum possible sharing rate for its track (or payment model within a track) under the current extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy. The sharing rate for such an ACO would not be affected by our proposal to re-institute scaled shared savings as described in section III.G.4.b.(2) of the proposed rule. That is, an ACO affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance that meets the proposed alternative quality performance standard, if finalized, would continue to qualify for the maximum sharing rate for its track (or payment model within a track) rather than receiving a sharing rate scaled based on the ACO's quality performance.

An ACO participating in the ENHANCED track that is affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance and is liable for shared losses already receives a shared loss rate that is scaled by the ACO's quality performance under the current extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy. If such an ACO meets the proposed alternative quality performance standard, if finalized, it would continue to receive a shared loss rate that is scaled by its quality performance. Thus, our proposal to extend scaled shared losses to ENHANCED track ACOs that meet the alternate quality performance as described in section III.G.4.b.(3) of the proposed rule would not, by itself, have a practical impact on the shared loss rate for an ACOs affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance.

With regard to the proposed health equity adjustment, for an ACO affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance that reports eCQMs/MIPS CQMs via the APP, and successfully meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 and case minimum requirement at § 414.1380, we proposed to apply the health equity adjustment bonus points to the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score, as described in section III.G.4.b.(7) of the proposed rule (87 FR 46134 and 46135), before determining the “higher of” score under the extreme and controllable circumstances policy. That is, the ACO would receive the higher of the quality performance score equal to the sum of the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score and the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points (that is, the health equity adjusted quality performance score) or a score equivalent to the 30th percentile (for PY 2023) or 40th percentile (for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years) across all MIPS Quality performance category scores. We proposed to specify the use of the health equity adjusted quality performance score in determining the quality performance score for an ACO affected by extreme and uncontrollable circumstances within the proposed new provision at § 425.512(b) and in determining the “higher of” score under the redesignated provisions at § 425.512(c)(3)(ii) and (iii).

As explained in the proposed rule (87 FR 46134 and 46135), the proposed approach of applying the health equity adjustment before determining the “higher of” score under the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy would have no practical impact on the sharing rate for an ACO that is eligible to share in savings. By design, such an ACO would meet or exceed the 30th percentile (for PY 2023) or 40th percentile (for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years) MIPS Quality performance category score, and qualify for the maximum sharing rate for its track (or payment model within a track). However, for an ACO participating in the ENHANCED track that is liable for shared losses, the application of the health equity adjustment could increase the ACO's quality performance score used to determine the ACO's shared loss rate, and thus potentially reduce the amount of shared losses owed to CMS.

For an ACO affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance that fails to report quality data via the APP or that reports but fails to the meet data completeness or case minimum requirements, we would continue to set the ACO's quality performance score to the equivalent of the 30th percentile (for PY 2023) or 40th percentile (for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years) MIPS Quality performance category score. Such an ACO would not meet the proposed requirements for the health equity adjustment with respect to reporting and measure performance.

We did not receive any comments on the proposed revisions to the application of the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy, and for the reasons stated above and in the proposed rule (87 FR 46142 and 46143), we are finalizing the revisions as proposed.

(9) Summary of the Final Policies

The following provides an overview of the quality performance standards that apply to future performance years for the purpose of determining the rate at which an ACO may share in savings.

Performance Year 2023

• PY 2023, to share in savings at the maximum savings rate under its track (or payment model within a track), an ACO must:

++ Report the 10 CMS Web Interface measures in the APP measure set, administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey, while we would calculate the two claims-based measures included under the APP, and achieve a health equity adjusted quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the 30th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility based-scoring, or

++ Report the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in the APP measure set, administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey, while we would calculate the two claims-based measures included under the APP. If an ACO selects this option, meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter and the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 of this subchapter for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, the ACO must achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 30th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining five measures in the APP measure set.

• An ACO that fails to meet the criteria above may qualify to share in savings on a sliding scale based on its performance on any of the 10 CMS Web Interface measures or three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, CAHPS for MIPS survey, and CMS' calculation of the two claims-based measures in the APP measure set that are reported by the ACO. The ACO must achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set to share in savings (if otherwise eligible) at a lower rate that is scaled by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score.

• If an ACO (1) does not report any of the ten CMS Web Interface measures or any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and (2) does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP, the ACO will not meet the quality performance standard or the alternative quality performance standard.

Performance Year 2024

• PY 2024, to share in the savings at the maximum rate under its track (or payment model within a track) an ACO must:

++ Report the 10 CMS Web Interface measures in the APP measure set, administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey, while we would calculate the two claims-based measures included under the APP, and achieve a health equity adjusted quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility based-scoring, or

++ Report the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in the APP measure set and administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey, while we would calculate the two claims-based measures included under the APP. If an ACO selects this option, meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter and the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 of this subchapter for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, the ACO must achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining five measures in the APP measure set.

• An ACO that fails to meet the criteria above may share in savings on a sliding scale based on its performance on any of the 10 CMS Web Interface measures or three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, CAHPS for MIPS survey, and CMS' calculation of the two claims-based measures in the APP measure set that are reported by the ACO. The ACO must achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set to share in savings (if otherwise eligible) at a lower rate that is scaled by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score.

• If an ACO (1) does not report any of the 10 CMS Web Interface measures or any of the 3 eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and (2) does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP, the ACO will not meet the quality performance standard or the alternative quality performance standard.

Performance Year 2025 and Subsequent Performance Years

• PY 2025 and subsequent performance years, to share in savings at the maximum savings rate under its track (or payment model within a track), an ACO must: report quality data via the APP established under § 414.1367 of this subchapter, according to the method of submission established by CMS and achieve a health equity adjusted quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring.

• An ACO that fails to meet the criteria above may share in savings on a sliding scale based on its performance on any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, CAHPS for MIPS survey, and CMS's calculation of the two claims-based measures in the APP measure set that are reported by the ACO. The ACO must achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set to share in savings (if otherwise eligible) at a lower rate that is scaled by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score.

• If an ACO does not report any of the 3 eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP, the ACO will not meet the quality performance standard or the alternative quality performance standard.

Similarly, we are adopting a methodology for calculating shared losses under the ENHANCED track to account for the sliding scale approach, which would remove the “cliff” from the all-or-nothing approach instituted in the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84734 through 84736) whereby an ACO that does not meet the quality performance standard would automatically face the maximum shared loss rate of 75 percent. For PY 2023 and subsequent performance years, an ACO that has losses that exceed its minimum loss rate and either meets the quality performance standard or does not meet that standard but meets the proposed alternative quality performance standard by achieving a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set would have a shared loss rate that is 1 minus the product of the maximum sharing rate for the ACO's track (75 percent) and the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score. The shared loss rate would be subject to a minimum of 40 percent and a maximum of 75 percent.

An ACO that reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and administers the CAHPS for MIPS survey, may receive up to a maximum of 10 points added to its MIPS Quality performance category score. This combined score would be the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score and would be used in determining whether the ACO met the quality performance standard and in determining scaled shared savings and shared losses, as applicable, as summarized in this section of the proposed rule. This health equity adjusted quality performance score will also be used when applying the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy for ACOs that report quality data via the APP and meet data completeness and case minimum requirements.

In addition, we clarify that any requirements that are based on achieving a specified quality performance score on outcome measures are limited to outcome measures that are scored. For example, please refer to Table 62 in section III.G.4.c.(1) of this final rule, which indicates the CMS Web Interface measure Depression Remission at Twelve months is an outcome measure that is not scored.

We reiterate our statement in the CY 2022 PFS final rule that for PYs 2022, 2023 and 2024 if an ACO: (1) does not report any of the 10 CMS Web Interface measures or any of the 3 eCQMs/MIPS CQMs; and (2) does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP, the ACO will not meet the quality performance standard (86 FR 65261). In addition, we are adopting that, for PYs 2023 and 2024, an ACO that does not meet these requirements would also fail to meet the alternative quality performance standard. Such an ACO would not be eligible to share in savings and, if in the ENHANCED track, would automatically face the maximum shared loss rate.

Additionally, as finalized in the CY 2022 PFS final rule, beginning with PY 2025, ACOs will be required to report eCQMs/MIPS CQMS, as the Web Interface reporting option sunsets after PY 2024 (86 FR 65261).

As discussed in section III.G.5.f. of this final rule, we are finalizing our proposal to allow certain ACOs in the BASIC track that do not meet their MSR to receive reduced shared savings. Accordingly, ACOs that meet the requirements of that policy will share in savings at a rate equal to one half of the final sharing rate determined based on the ACO's quality performance, as described in this section.

In Table 61 in section III.G.4.b.(9) of this final rule, we summarized the proposed changes to the regulation at § 425.512(a)(4) and (5) to reflect these proposed changes to the quality reporting requirements for PY 2023 and subsequent performance years.

We are finalizing the proposed health equity adjustment calculation of an underserved multiplier at § 425.512(b)(2)(iv)(A) with a modification to use enrollment in the Part D LIS, in addition to Medicare and Medicaid dual eligibility and ADI score to determine the underserved multiplier. Specifically, the underserved multiplier will be determined based on the higher of the proportion of an ACO's assigned beneficiaries who are enrolled in LIS or dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid and the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries who reside in a census blocks with high ADI. We are also finalizing a revision to § 425.512(b)(3)(iii) which provides that the health equity adjusted quality performance score is used for determining the shared loss rate for calculating shared losses under the ENHANCED track with a modification to correct the citation to the applicable performance standard. The language contained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule inadvertently omitted any reference to paragraph (a)(5)(ii), which includes the performance standard for PY 2024 and subsequent years.

We note that the quality performance standard policies we finalized in the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65270) for the first performance year of an ACO's first agreement period under the Shared Savings Program will continue to remain applicable in addition to the quality performance standard policies we are finalizing in this final rule.

In Table 61 of this final rule, we summarize the final changes to the regulation at § 425.512(a)(4) and (5) to reflect these final changes to the quality reporting requirements and quality performance standard for PY 2023 and subsequent performance years. Performance benchmarks used to determine the 10th, 30th, and 40th percentiles will be posted on the Quality Payment Program Resource Library website at https://qpp.cms.gov/resources/resource-library . Performance benchmarks differ by collection type (that is, eCQM, MIPS CQM, CMS Web Interface) and are updated for each performance year.

c. Quality Measures

(1) Final APP Measure Set

We refer readers to Table 62, which lists the measures included in the final APP measure set that will be reported by Shared Savings Program ACOs for PY 2022 and subsequent performance years. These are the same measures finalized in the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65264 through 65266); however, we note that the Meaningful Measures 2.0 area for each measure has been updated to be consistent with the latest information available on the Meaningful Measures website and a measure number has been added for the Risk Standardized, All-Cause Unplanned Admissions for Multiple Chronic Conditions for MIPS measure. 295 We proposed to change the nomenclature of this measure to align with the MIPS program. There are no other changes to this measure except for the name and the addition of a measure number. The measure title we proposed to use moving forward is Measure 484: Clinician and Clinician Group Risk-standardized Hospital Admission Rates for Patients with Multiple Chronic Conditions. In addition, we have included the measure type in Table 62, for each measure in the measure set. We are including this information to provide ACOs a list of the outcome measures for purposes of meeting the quality performance incentive for reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. This information is also relevant to our proposal to establish an alternative quality performance standard under which ACOs that fail to meet the quality performance standard to qualify for the maximum sharing rate, but that achieve a quality performance score at the 10th percentile on 1 of the 4 outcome measures in the APP measure set, may be eligible to share in savings on a sliding scale. We noted inclusion of this information does not change any of the measures in the measure set.

295 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Meaningful Measures 2.0: Moving from Measure Reduction to Modernization, (2022), available at https://www.cms.gov/meaningful-measures-20-moving-measure-reduction-modernization .

Table 63 includes the proposed eCQM/MIPS CQM measure set for the Shared Savings Program and outlines the measure types, especially for ACOs that may elect to report on eCQM/MIPS CQMs for PY2023 in order to qualify for the incentive under § 425.512(a)(4)(i)(B).

The CMS Web Interface collection type under traditional MIPS and the APP includes 10 measures. One of the 10 measures included in the CMS Web Interface collection type is measure Q110: Preventive Care and Screening: Influenza Immunization (also referred to PREV-7 under the CMS Web Interface collection type). Table Group CC of Appendix 1 of the proposed rule includes a proposal to remove measure Q110: Preventive Care and Screening: Influenza Immunization from traditional MIPS for the Medicare Part B Claims, eCQM, and MIPS CQM collection types starting with the 2023 performance period and a proposal to retain the measure for use in relevant MVPs and as a measure in the CMS Web Interface collection type under the APP for purposes of APM Entity-level reporting applicable to Medicare Shared Savings Program ACOs. Because Shared Savings Program ACOs report under the APP, this measure would still be available as a measure under the CMS Web Interface collection type. Please refer to Table Group CC of Appendix 1 where we discuss this proposal further. We also proposed to make changes to measure specifications for the CMS Web Interface starting in PY 2023. As proposed, the changes would update measures and align these measures with the CQM practice workflows and for consistency with clinical guidelines.

We did not receive any comments on the proposed change to the name and addition of a measure number to one of the administrative claims-based measures (Measure 484: Clinician and Clinician Group Risk-standardized Hospital Admission Rates for Patients with Multiple Chronic Conditions) to align with the MIPS program.

For the reasons stated above and in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46097), we are finalizing the proposal to change the name and add a measure number to the administrative claims-based measure, Measure 484: Clinician and Clinician Group Risk-standardized Hospital Admission Rates for Patients with Multiple Chronic Conditions, to align this measure with the MIPS program for PY 2022 and subsequent performance years.

(2) Benchmarking Policies for CMS Web Interface Measures for Performance Years 2022, 2023, and 2024

In the CY 2021 PFS final rule, we finalized a change to the quality reporting requirements for purposes of the Shared Savings Program (85 FR 84720 through 84734). Effective for PY 2021 and subsequent performance years, Shared Savings Program ACOs are required to report quality data via the APP. Under this new approach, ACOs only need to report one set of quality metrics via the APP to satisfy the quality reporting requirements under both the Shared Savings Program and the MIPS. In the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84720), we explained that the APP measure set would address the highest priorities for quality measurement and improvement, while also reducing reporting burden, promoting alignment of measures and consolidation of reporting requirements across CMS programs, moving payment toward value, and identifying consumers' key quality performance metrics. We also stated that, under the APP, the quality performance score for an ACO will be calculated using the same benchmarks that are established for quality measures available under MIPS (85 FR 84724). Measure benchmarks established under MIPS are based on performance by collection type (that is, eCQM or MIPS CQM) using data from all available sources, including MIPS eligible clinicians and APM Entities, to the extent feasible, during the applicable baseline or performance period (§ 414.1380(b)(1)). Under § 414.1380(b)(1)(ii)(A), the benchmarks from the corresponding reporting year of the Shared Savings Program are used to score CMS Web Interface measures for purposes of the MIPS Quality performance category. Accordingly, in the preamble to the CY 2021 PFS we indicated that for PY 2021, we would continue to use the Shared Savings Program benchmarks developed for the CMS Web Interface measures for PY 2020, which were based on data reported by ACOs, MIPS eligible clinicians, and groups through the CMS Web Interface, and/or a registry from 2016, 2017 and 2018, which would allow us to be consistent with the approach that had been used for scoring CMS Web Interface measures in the Shared Savings Program under § 425.502(b) (85 FR 84724). Furthermore, consistent with the final policy to require ACOs to report quality data via the APP and to score those measures using the MIPS benchmarks, in the CY 2021 PFS final rule, we revised § 425.502 to apply only to performance years beginning on or before January 1, 2020.

Under the policies adopted in the CY 2021 PFS final rule, PY 2021 would have been the final year in which ACOs would have the option to report either the 10 CMS Web Interface measures or the 3 eCQMs/MIPs CQMs under the APP, and starting in PY 2022 all ACOs would be required to report the 3 eCQMs/MIPS CQMs (85 FR 84722 and 84723). However, as explained in the proposed rule, in response to concerns raised by commenters regarding the timeline for implementing eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting requirements under the APP for Shared Savings Program ACOs in the CY 2022 PFS final rule, we further extended the CMS Web Interface as a collection type under the Quality Payment Program for PYs 2022, 2023, and 2024 for Shared Savings Program ACOs reporting under the APP (85 FR 65261).

When we finalized the extension of the CMS Web Interface as a collection type for the Shared Savings Program, we failed to consider the policies that would apply for purposes of establishing the performance benchmark and minimum attainment level for the CMS Web Interface measures for PYs 2022, 2023, and 2024. As noted previously, when we adopted the requirement that ACOs report quality for purposes of the Shared Savings Program using the APP, our intent was to use the measure benchmarks established under MIPS to score the measures in the APP measure set. However, under § 414.1380(b)(1)(ii)(A), we use the benchmarks from the corresponding reporting year of the Shared Savings Program to score CMS Web Interface measures for purposes of the MIPS Quality performance category. Thus, because the benchmarking policies under § 425.502(b) that were used to establish quality measure benchmarks in the Shared Savings Program prior to the development and implementation of the APP were sunset with the 2020 performance year, there are no policies currently in place that can be used to establish benchmarks for the CMS Web Interface measures in the APP measure set for purposes of determining quality performance under the Shared Savings Program for PYs 2022, 2023, and 2024. Additionally, the absence of benchmarking policies under the Shared Savings Program also impacts MIPS because MIPS uses the CMS Web Interface measure benchmarks established by the Shared Savings Program (§ 414.1380(b)(1)(ii)(B)).

Under the regulation at § 425.502(b)(4)(i), CMS updated the quality performance benchmarks every 2 years. The last set of CMS Web Interface measure benchmarks were established for PY 2020 and were also used to score the Web Interface measures for PY 2021 as explained in the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84724). In light of the decision to extend the availability of the CMS Web Interface measures under the APP, we now need to establish benchmarks under the Shared Savings Program for these measures for PYs 2022, 2023, and 2024. We noted in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46150) that we believe that the previously established benchmark policies at § 425.502(b) continue to be appropriate for purposes of establishing the quality measure benchmarks and minimum attainment levels and establishing a point scale for the CMS Web Interface measures under the Shared Savings Program for PYs 2022, 2023, and 2024. In the 2015 PFS final rule (79 FR 67927), we finalized the benchmarking proposal to set benchmarks for 2 years for stability in quality improvement targets while also maintaining reasonable current practices. We proposed in the 2023 PFS proposed rule to use this approach for PYs 2022, 2023 and 2024, using available data for PYs 2022 and 2023 and establishing benchmarks for PY 2024 which is the last year of Web Interface reporting (87 FR 46150). We noted that we believe the policies are still appropriate as it would provide stability during the transition to all-payer reporting and sunsetting of the Web Interface reporting option, as well as prevent potential variations that could unintentionally create provider burden. In addition, this would allow CMS to score as many of the Web Interface measures as possible, providing stronger incentives for improving and delivering high quality care. Furthermore, using the same policies to establish the benchmarks for the CMS Web Interface measures for PYs 2022, 2023, 2024, would maintain consistency in the development of CMS Web Interface measure benchmarks. Therefore, we proposed to amend the regulation at § 425.512, which governs the ACO quality performance standard for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2021, to include a new paragraph (a)(6), which will provide that for PYs 2022, 2023, and 2024, CMS designates a performance benchmark and minimum attainment level for each CMS Web Interface measure and establishes a point scale for the measure as described in § 425.502(b) (87 FR 46150).

We acknowledged that to the extent we proposed to apply these benchmark policies to determine performance benchmarks for the Web Interface measures for PY 2022, the proposal would be retroactive and would require the use of our authority under section 1871(e)(1)(A) of the Act, which permits the retroactive application of a substantive change in the regulations when the failure to do so would be “contrary to the public interest.” We stated our belief that this proposal meets the standard for retroactive rulemaking as absent retroactive application of the proposed benchmarking policies the CMS Web Interface measures could not be scored in PY 2022 for use under the Shared Savings Program in determining shared savings and losses or under MIPS for purposes of the MIPS payment adjustments (87 FR 46150). We also note that by establishing policies that will allow us to adopt benchmarks for these measures, we will ensure that we can determine the ACOs' quality performance score. If we did not have the authority to establish benchmarks, we would be unable to score ACO quality performance which is used to calculate shared savings and losses inhibiting our ability to successfully implement the Shared Savings Program and recognize and reward ACOs for better care coordination and quality improvement. At the same time, the lack of benchmarks to score quality measures submitted by ACOs would prevent their MIPS eligible clinicians from receiving any MIPS payment adjustment they may be eligible for and could subject them to negative MIPS payment adjustments if they are determined to have poor performance due to the inability to benchmark performance and score the measures submitted by the ACO. In addition, as mentioned above it is in the public interest to establish benchmarks as it should strengthen the incentive for ACOs to deliver high quality and coordinated care consistent with the goals of the Shared Savings Program. We believe there are advantages in having a greater number of scored measures in the CMS Web Interface, including the ability for Shared Savings Program ACOs to report on a larger number of measures to have a potentially higher score, as well as collecting data on measures that can be used for ACOs' quality improvement. An ACO's performance on each measure is assessed against its benchmark to determine points and the overall Quality performance category score. Additionally, when CMS determines that a benchmark cannot be provided for a Web Interface measure, the measure will not be scored for Shared Savings Program ACOs. However, ACOs would still be required to report on any measure that is not scored in order to complete the CMS Web Interface dataset.

We also need to make a correction from the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65266) in which we inadvertently indicated that a benchmark would not be created for the Preventive Care and Screening: Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID# 226). In the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65262), we noted three of the CMS Web Interface measures (Statin Therapy for the Prevention and Treatment of Cardiovascular Disease (Quality ID# 438); Depression Remission at Twelve Months (Quality ID# 370), and Preventive Care and Screening: Tobacco Cessation: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID# 226)) did not have benchmarks for PY 2022 and would not be scored, however, the measures were required to be reported in order to complete the CMS Web Interface dataset (87 FR 46150). We refer to Table 62 for a listing of the measures that would not have benchmarks, and therefore, would not be scored for PY 2022.

We have determined that we do not have adequate historical data available for benchmarking for the Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-up Plan (Quality ID# 134) measure for the 2022 performance year. Therefore, we proposed pursuant to § 425.512(b)(6) to set flat percentage benchmarks for the Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-up Plan (Quality ID# 134) measure (87 FR 46150). Since we stated in the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65266) that a benchmark would be created for Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-up Plan (Quality ID# 134), we find it suitable to use flat percentage benchmarks to measure performance on the measure.

We proposed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule to score the Preventive Care and Screening: Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID# 226) measure using flat percentage benchmarks under the approach we proposed to amend the regulation at § 425.512 (87 FR 46151). The Preventive Care and Screening: Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID# 226) measure triggered flat percentage benchmarks by the policies described at § 425.502(b)(2)(ii) in the previous benchmarking update for the 2020 and 2021 performance years. Therefore, as noted in the proposed rule, we believe it would be advantageous for the measure to keep its flat percentage benchmarks for the 2022 performance year for continuity and that having another scored measure can be beneficial to an ACO's overall quality performance.

As we proposed for Preventive Care and Screening: Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID# 226) and the Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-up Plan (Quality ID# 134) to be scored using flat percentage benchmarks for the 2022 performance year, ACOs would be scored on eight out of ten CMS Web Interface measures. We also noted that we believe ACOs might prefer to be scored under a greater number of measures which may improve their overall score and performance for purposes of Shared Savings Program quality assessment. Lastly, use of flat percentages allows ACOs with high scores to earn maximum or near maximum achievement points while allowing room for improvement and rewarding that improvement in subsequent years. Use of flat percentages also helps to ensure that ACOs with high performance on a measure are not penalized as low performers. For the 2023 performance year, we expect to apply flat percentages for the Preventive Care and Screening: Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID# 226) and the Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-up Plan (Quality ID# 134) as the Medicare data may not be unavailable or may be inadequate.

We sought comment on this proposal.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposed revisions to the benchmarking policies for CMS Web Interface measures for PYs 2022, 2023, and 2024 and our responses:

Comment: A few commenters supported the proposal to set flat percentage benchmarks for the Preventive Care and Screening: Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID# 226) Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-up Plan (Quality ID# 134) measures.

One commenter stated that this policy change may allow some ACOs with high performance to earn maximum achievement points but noted that it could be difficult for ACOs to adjust their performance unless the flat benchmarks are provided in advance. The commenter recommended that a flat benchmark of 75 percent of the average score of all ACOs in the prior year be utilized for both measures.

Response: We note that use of flat percentages allows ACOs with high scores to earn maximum or near maximum achievement points while allowing room for improvement and rewarding that improvement in subsequent years. Use of flat percentages also helps to ensure that ACOs with high performance on a measure are not penalized as low performers.

Comment: Most of the commenters opposed the proposal to use flat percentage benchmarks to score these two quality measures for PY 2022. The commenters stated that this proposed policy change would mean that ACOs would be scored on eight out of 10 Web Interface measures versus 7 measures for PY 2022 which diverges from the policy previously finalized for CY 2022. The commenters requested that CMS maintain the previous finalized policy, especially because the change was proposed after the start of the performance year and would apply retroactively.

Response: As stated in the proposed rule, we acknowledge that we inadvertently indicated in the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65266) that a benchmark would not be created for the Preventive Care and Screening: Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID# 226). We note, however, that in the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65266), the Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-up Plan (Quality ID# 134) measure was included in the final APP measure set that must be reported by Shared Savings Program ACOs for PY 2022 and subsequent performance years.

In the CY 2023 proposed rule, we proposed to score the Preventative Care and Screening: Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID# 226) measure using flat percentage benchmarks under the approach we proposed at § 425.512(a)(6). During the previous benchmarking update for the 2020 and 2021 performance years, this measure was subject to a flat percentage benchmark pursuant to § 425.502(b)(2)(ii). Correcting our inadvertent statement in the CY 2022 PFS final rule that this measure would not have a benchmark does not result in a departure from our long-standing benchmark methodology for the measure. Accordingly, we believe that correcting this inadvertent error is in the public interest because it provides continuity of policy and having another scored measure allows for a more accurate measure of an ACO's overall quality performance. More broadly, flat percentage benchmarks allow ACOs with high scores to earn maximum or near maximum achievement points while allowing room for improvement for ACOs with lower scores and rewarding that improvement in subsequent years. Furthermore, use of flat percentages also helps to ensure that ACOs with high performance on a measure are not penalized as low performers.

Comment: One commenter supported the previous finalized policy for establishing benchmarks for the Web Interface measures but did not support switching from pay for reporting to pay for performance for the Preventive Care and Screening: Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID# 226) measure stating that changing whether a measure will be scored or not this late within the reporting period is unreasonable and will likely require additional data collection effort and burden on ACOs while they are still operating under the COVID-19 PHE. The commenter noted that this change sets an unreasonable precedent and CMS should not make these kinds of significant revisions this late in the reporting period. Another commenter also stated that making changes to the policy during the performance year is unfair and ignores how quality improvement efforts are operationalized in ACOs. The commenter urged CMS to continue making these measures pay-for-reporting for 2022, as was finalized in the 2022 MPFS rule. In addition, one commenter suggested that CMS treat the Preventive Care and Screening: Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID# 226) as a new measure for PY 2022 and giving it a 7-point scoring floor since ACOs were not expecting to be scored on this measure for PY 2022. The commenters requested that CMS maintain the previous finalized policy, especially when the retroactive application would apply during a performance year.

One commenter stated that if CMS uses data submitted during CY 2023, that ACO eligible clinicians will not have a clear understanding of their performance and areas for improvement if benchmarks are not set in advance. The commenter encouraged CMS to continue using historical benchmarks for quality reporting.

Response: As stated in the proposed rule (87 FR 46150), we acknowledge that to the extent we proposed to apply these benchmark policies to determine performance benchmarks for the Web Interface measures for PY 2022, our proposal was retroactive and would require the use of our authority under section 1871(e)(1)(A) of the Act. We continue to believe that applying these benchmark policies to assess ACOs' quality performance for PY2022 is in the public interest for the reasons stated in the proposed rule and above.

We appreciate that some commenters believe that correcting our inadvertent designation of the Preventative Care and Screening: Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID# 226) measure as “pay for reporting” may require changes in processes for some ACOs; however, we note that prior to this correction, ACOs were still obligated to collect data and report on this measure. There is thus no new reporting burden on ACOs resulting from this correction. Additionally, we note that this correction does not introduce requirements related to or the scoring of a novel measure with which ACO providers/suppliers may be unfamiliar; the measure has been used in the Shared Savings Program for over four years. We also note that based on measure scores in prior performance years, most ACOs would score sufficiently well on this measure that scoring this measure would not negatively affect their overall quality performance score. Lastly, we note that the Shared Savings Program's extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy is applicable for the duration of the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency. 296 For the months this policy is applicable, an ACO's minimum quality performance score is set to the equivalent of the 30th percentile MIPS Quality performance category performance score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year (42 CFR 425.512(b)(2)(i)). The application of this policy thus mitigates potential negative effects of an ACO's poor Quality performance score on this measure that might arise from CMS correcting its error at this time. For these reasons, the benefits to the Shared Savings Program, ACOs, and the public justify correcting this error now.

296 https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-cms-flexibilities-fight-covid-19.pdf .

We separately note that there are not “pay for reporting” measures under the APP. A measure that is not benchmarked is excluded from the quality performance category score. Prior to adoption of the APP, if an ACO satisfactorily reported a “pay for reporting” measure, they would receive full points for the measure (§ 425.502(c)(5)). If a measure without a benchmark is not reported or does not meet data completeness, a score of zero will be added to the measure calculation.

After consideration of the public comments and for the reasons stated above and in the proposed rule (87 FR 46148 through 46150), we are finalizing the proposal to add new § 425.512(a)(6), which provides that for performance years 2022, 2023, and 2024, CMS designates a performance benchmark and minimum attainment level for each CMS Web Interface measure and establishes a point scale for the measure as described in § 425.502(b). We anticipate providing flat percentage benchmarks for the Preventative Care and Screening: Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID# 226) and the Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-up Plan (Quality ID# 134) measures will not create additional burden for or adversely affect the Quality performance scores of ACOs and will likely have a positive impact to ACO quality performance scores. Additionally, we are finalizing the proposal to establish and use flat benchmarks to score the following CMS Web Interface measures during PY 2022 and subsequent performance years: Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-up Plan (Quality ID#: 134) and Preventive Care and Screening: Tobacco Use: Screening and Cessation Intervention (Quality ID#: 226).

d. Clarifying the Use of Unweighted MIPS Quality Performance Category Scores for Quality Performance Standard Determinations Under the Shared Savings Program

In the CY 2022 PFS proposed and final rules (86 FR 39274 and 86 FR 65271), we stated that the PY 2018 MIPS Quality performance category score at the 30th percentile was equivalent to 83.9 and the MIPS Quality performance category score at the 40th percentile was equivalent to 93.3. For PY 2019, the MIPS Quality performance category score at 30th percentile was equivalent to 87.9 and the MIPS Quality performance category score at the 40th percentile was equivalent to 95.7. We also stated that, for a given performance year, the 30th or 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores would be calculated after MIPS final scoring is complete based on the distribution across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for scoring for facility-based scoring. Therefore, we are not able to provide performance rate information prior to or during the performance year. Nevertheless, we stated that we believe that publicly displaying prior year performance scores that equate to the 30th and 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores for the applicable performance year would still provide helpful information for ACOs to determine what level of quality performance they would need to meet in order to satisfy the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program. We stated that we would release this historical information on the Shared Savings Program website as soon as it becomes available.

While conducting analysis on the MIPS Quality performance category score data files after the publication of the CY 2022 PFS final rule, we determined that we erroneously used the weighted distribution of Quality performance category scores, rather than an unweighted distribution of Quality performance category scores, to calculate the 30th and 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores provided in the CY 2022 PFS proposed and final rules for 2018 and 2019. The weighted distribution of Quality performance category scores is used in MIPS for final payment calculations. The unweighted distribution of Quality performance category scores submitted by ACOs, groups, and individuals has historically been used to calculate benchmarks for quality measure performance under MIPS and the Shared Savings Program.

In the proposed rule, we clarified that, despite the publication error, we used the submission level MIPS Quality performance category scores (unweighted distribution of scores) to determine the 30th percentile and 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores for purposes of establishing the applicable quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program. We also clarified that we use an ACO's submission, which is considered the unweighted distribution of Quality performance category scores, to calculate its MIPS Quality performance category score for purposes of determining whether the ACO meets the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program in PY 2021 and subsequent performance years. As noted in the proposed rule (87 FR 46148), the policy aligns with the MIPS and Shared Savings Program benchmarking policies and is consistent with our original intended methodology of using the unweighted distribution based on submission data to calculate the MIPS Quality performance category scores for ACOs as we did to calculate the impacts of the Shared Savings Program quality performance standard proposals in the CY 2021 PFS proposed rule (85 FR 50380).

Based on the use of the unweighted distribution of the Quality performance category scores, for PY 2018, the MIPS Quality performance category score at the 30th percentile is equivalent to 59.30 and the MIPS Quality performance category score at the 40th percentile is equivalent to 70.80. For PY 2019, the MIPS Quality performance category score at 30th percentile is equivalent to 58.00 and the MIPS Quality performance category score at the 40th percentile is equivalent to 70.82. For PY 2020, the MIPS Quality performance category score at 30th percentile is equivalent to 63.90 and the MIPS Quality performance category score at the 40th percentile is equivalent to 75.59. See Table 54 of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46151) outlining the historical unweighted MIPS Quality performance category scores for PYs 2018-2020.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on our clarification of the use of unweighted MIPS Quality performance category scores for quality performance standard determinations under the Shared Savings Program and our responses:

Comment: One commenter supported the clarification regarding the use of the unweighted distribution of MIPS Quality performance category scores to determine the 30th percentile and 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores for purposes of establishing the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program.

Response: We appreciate the commenter's support of the clarification.

Comment: Several commenters requested that CMS clarify what is meant by “unweighted” and “weighted” distribution of MIPS Quality performance category scores.

Response: In response to comments, we are clarifying what is meant by the “unweighted” and “weighted” distribution of MIPS Quality performance category scores. The weighted distribution of Quality performance category scores is used in MIPS for final payment calculations and applies the Quality performance category scores to individual providers (rather than to the submitting entity, which can be an ACO, other APM entity, group, or individual provider). The unweighted distribution of Quality performance category scores is based on the Quality performance category scores of the submitting entity (for example, ACOs, other APM entities, groups, and individual providers), and each submission contributes one score to the distribution. The submission-level quality data has historically been used to calculate benchmarks for quality measure performance under MIPS and the Shared Savings Program. The MIPS Quality performance category score values do not change from the unweighted to weighted distribution. The only difference between the two distributions is the number of data points observed with a given score.

For illustrative purposes, we are providing an example using the average (instead of the 30th or 40th percentile) for the quality performance standard. In this example, there are three submitting entities: an ACO, a MIPS group, and an individual MIPS provider. The MIPS Quality performance category scores for these submitting entities are 90 for the ACO, 70 for the MIPS Group, and 50 for the individual MIPS provider. The average of the unweighted distribution of scores is (90 + 70 + 50)/3 = 70 where each submitting entity contributes one score. The weighted distribution of scores takes into account the number of individual providers from each submitting entity. The ACO has 10 providers, the MIPS Group has four providers, and the individual MIPS provider has one provider. The average of the weighted distribution is ((90 × 10) + (70 × 4) + (50 × 1))/15 = 82.

As clarified in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46148), we use the submission-level MIPS Quality performance category scores (unweighted distribution of scores) to determine the 30th percentile and 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores for purposes of establishing the applicable quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program. As noted in the proposed rule (87 FR 46148), the policy aligns with the MIPS and Shared Savings Program benchmarking policies and is consistent with our original intended methodology of using the unweighted distribution based on submission-level data to calculate the MIPS Quality performance category scores for ACOs and other entities/providers, as we did to calculate the impacts of the Shared Savings Program quality performance standard proposals in the CY 2021 PFS proposed rule (85 FR 50380).

Comment: A few commenters requested more transparency in the application of MIPS Quality performance scores to the Shared Savings Program and recommended that CMS publish MIPS Quality performance category scores in the Public Use Files (PUF) annually so that ACOs and other stakeholders can reproduce the calculations and have more transparency around how the performance standard is established.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' feedback. In the Medicare Shared Savings Program Performance Year Financial and Quality Results PUF, we provided several ACO-specific variables related to quality performance results including the ACO's quality score, an indicator for if the ACO met the quality performance standard, indicators for each of the three measure reporting options (that is, Web Interface, eCQM, MIPS CQM), and an indicator if the ACO did not completely report quality for any of the reporting options. We may consider adding additional ACO-specific variables in future years. ACOs can review their measure-specific performance used to calculate their MIPS Quality performance category score in their MIPS performance feedback. For PY 2021, the quality performance score was based on the ACO's performance on the quality measures reported under the Alternative Payment Model (APM) Performance Pathway (APP), any applicable MIPS bonus points, and quality improvement points. For ACOs determined to have been affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance, the quality score was the higher of the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score or the 30th percentile across all MIPS Quality percentile category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring. We also provide quality measure benchmarks for the current performance year on the Shared Savings Program website at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/sharedsavingsprogram/program-guidance-and-specifications .

Since the publication of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we have calculated that, for PY 2021, the MIPS Quality performance category score at the 30th percentile is equivalent to 61.73 and the MIPS Quality performance category score at the 40th percentile is equivalent to 77.83. See Table 64 outlining the historical unweighted MIPS Quality performance category scores for PYs 2018-2021.

e. Addressing MIPS Quality Performance Category Score Corrections in the Shared Savings Program's Reopening Authority

As finalized in the CY 2021 PFS final rule, beginning with PY 2021, the Shared Savings Program will use an ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score under the APP to determine whether the ACO has met the Shared Savings Program's quality performance standard. In turn, the ACO's quality performance informs the amount of shared savings earned or shared losses owed. There are interactions between the Shared Savings Program's financial reconciliation timeline and the Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) targeted review process and other MIPS Quality performance category score-related corrections, and as a result, CMS may learn of errors in the calculation of MIPS Quality performance category scores after the issuance of an initial determination of financial performance under the Shared Savings Program.

CMS has sole discretion over when to reopen determinations of ACO shared savings and shared losses to correct errors for good cause. As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46151 through 46154), we believe that it would be appropriate to clarify the circumstances in which we would exercise our discretion to reopen the initial determination of an ACO's financial performance for good cause to correct errors in the determination of MIPS Quality performance category scores that affect the determination of whether an ACO is eligible for shared savings, the amount of shared savings due to the ACO, or the amount of shared losses owed by the ACO. In this section, we discuss these circumstances and explain how we will approach such reopenings, the process by which we would make any corrections, and the manner in which we will adjust shared savings payments to the ACO or shared loss recoupments from the ACO, if applicable.

Under § 425.315, CMS may reopen the initial determination or a final agency determination under 42 CFR part 425 subpart I and issue a revised initial determination: (1) at any time in the case of fraud or similar fault as defined in § 405.902; or (2) not later than 4 years after the date of the notification to the ACO of the initial determination of savings or losses for the relevant performance year, for good cause. Good cause may be established when: (1) there is new and material evidence that was not available or known at the time of the payment determination and may result in a different conclusion; or (2) the evidence that was considered in making the payment determination clearly shows on its face that an obvious error was made at the time of the payment determination.

In the June 2016 Medicare Shared Savings Program final rule, we noted in response to comments, that in order to provide an opportunity for CMS to consider updated information and make other adjustments to payment determinations across all ACOs, and to minimize program disruptions for ACOs resulting from multiple reopenings, we would, to the extent feasible, use a unified reopening (as opposed to multiple reopenings) to correct errors for a given performance year (81 FR 38001). In addition, we indicated that we would consider other ways to reduce operational burdens for both ACOs and CMS that could result from making payment adjustments to correct errors for good cause under the reopening provisions. For example, we explained that if, during the 4-year time period following notification of the initial payment determination, we determine that a correction needs to be made to a prior performance year's results for good cause, we would seek to potentially adjust the shared savings payment to the ACO or the shared loss recoupment from the ACO for a subsequent performance year (81 FR 38001). To illustrate, we stated that if an ACO that generated shared savings for the second performance year of its agreement period owed CMS money based on a correction made to the payment determination for the prior performance year, we might be able to deduct the amount owed prior to making the shared savings payment for the current year (subject to the general Shared Savings Program requirement for ACOs to repay monies owed to CMS within 90 days of notification of the obligation). We also explained that ACOs would not be able to delay recoupment of any payments owed by notifying us of a possible error that could merit reopening (81 FR 38002). Instead, we stated that if we later determine that a correction should be made, we would subsequently combine, if feasible, the revised calculation of shared savings or shared losses for the affected performance year with the financial reconciliation for the most recent performance year. For example, we indicated that we would add any amount owed to the ACO as a result of a reopening, to any shared savings payment for which the ACO is eligible for the most recent performance year. We indicated that we expected to be able to provide ACOs with sufficient details regarding these corrections that they would be able to attribute the additional payment or recoupment arising from the reopening internally and, as applicable, distribute additional funds to or collect amounts from the appropriate ACO participants from the prior PY.

Further, we explained that in considering when to reopen an error for good cause, we intend to strike a careful balance between important Medicare program integrity concerns that payments be made timely and accurately under the Shared Savings Program with our desire to minimize unnecessary operational burdens for ACOs and CMS, and to support the ACOs' ability to invest in additional improvements to increase quality and efficiency of care (81 FR 38001). To achieve this careful balance in objectives, for reopenings to address CMS technical errors, we indicated that we may consider whether an error satisfies a materiality threshold, such as when it affects 3 percent of the total amount of net shared savings and shared losses for all ACOs for the applicable performance year. This was a threshold based on guidance from the Government Accountability Office (GAO) for financial audits of Federal entities. 297 We explained that although ACOs are not Federal entities, we believed it would be reasonable to consider the GAO guidance in determining when a technical error has a material effect across all ACOs, such that we should use our discretion to reopen for good cause.

297 GAO updated the guidance in 2020 and the recommended materiality threshold remains 3 percent. See Financial Audit Manual, Volume 1, Updated April 2020, 230-4, available at https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-18-601g.pdf .

As finalized in the CY 2021 PFS final rule, beginning with PY 2021, Shared Savings Program ACOs are required to report quality data for purposes of the Shared Savings Program via the APP under the Quality Payment Program (85 FR 84720 through 84736). An ACO will meet the Shared Savings Program quality performance standard if the ACO achieves a quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the percentile specified for the relevant performance year, across all MIPS Quality performance category scores (§ 425.512(a)(3) and (4)). In the CY 2022 PFS final rule, we finalized an extended phase-in of the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program (§ 425.512(a)(3) through (5); 86 FR 65266), which we discussed in detail in section III.G.4.b. of the proposed rule. In the proposed rule, we also explained that because ACOs are now reporting quality data via the APP and receiving MIPS Quality performance category scores, we are concerned that CMS may learn of errors in the calculation of MIPS Quality performance category scores after the Shared Savings Program has issued financial reconciliation reports (which are initial determinations of an ACO's financial performance for the applicable performance year). For this reason, we stated our belief that it would be appropriate to clarify the circumstances in which we would exercise our discretion to reopen the initial determination of an ACO's financial performance for good cause to correct errors in the determination of MIPS Quality performance category scores that affect the determination of whether an ACO is eligible for shared savings, the amount of shared savings due to the ACO, or the amount of shared losses owed by the ACO.

We issue (typically in the summer) MIPS performance feedback reports for the previous performance year to MIPS eligible clinicians, eligible practices that submitted data as a group, virtual groups, and APM entities. For ACOs, the MIPS performance feedback report includes data on ACO quality performance, but does not indicate whether the ACO has met the Shared Savings Program's quality performance standard. Each ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score is calculated using the ACO's performance on the measures reported under the APP (ACO-reported measures, CAHPS for MIPS survey measure, claims-based measures), any applicable MIPS bonus points, and quality improvement points. 298

298 See 2021 APP Toolkit, 2021 APM Performance Pathway for Shared Savings Program Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) Guide, slide 15, available at https://qpp-cm-prod-content.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/1495/2021%20APM%20Performance%20Pathway%20(APP)%20Toolkit.zip .

MIPS eligible clinicians, groups and APM entities (such as ACOs) may request a targeted review of the calculation of the MIPS payment adjustment factor pursuant to § 414.1385. The MIPS targeted review submission period starts once the MIPS performance feedback report is issued and remains open for 60 days with the reviews concluding on a rolling basis and may extend into October or November (§ 414.1385(a)(2)). If a request for a targeted review is approved, CMS may recalculate, to the extent feasible and applicable, the scores with regard to measures, activities, performance categories (including the quality performance category), and the final score, as well as the MIPS payment adjustment factors (§ 414.1385(a)(6)). For Shared Savings Program ACOs, changes to MIPS Quality performance category scores could affect the quality performance standard and have an impact on the amount of shared savings earned or shared losses owed by the ACOs. Further, because we were proposing to incorporate a sliding scale approach as part of the quality performance standard, we also acknowledged that a change to an ACO's own MIPS Quality performance category score could have an impact on the amount of shared savings earned by the ACO or the amount of shared losses owed to CMS under the ENHANCED track.

CMS aims to deliver the Shared Savings Program financial reconciliation reports that incorporate MIPS Quality performance category scores for the previous year to ACOs in August on an embargoed basis (that is, ACOs may not publicly release the information in these reports), and typically 2-3 weeks later an unembargoed basis, at which point ACOs can publicly share the information in the reports. Unlike the MIPS performance feedback reports, these reports indicate whether an ACO has met the Shared Savings Program's quality performance standard. In the proposed rule, we explained that under the proposed policies, an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score for a performance year and the determination of whether the ACO met the Shared Savings Program quality performance standard would affect the determination of shared savings for that performance year and, for ACOs participating in the ENHANCED track, the amount of any shared losses owed. The unembargoed financial reconciliation reports constitute an initial determination of the ACO's financial performance for the applicable performance year. With the initial determination, we also send demand letters to ACOs that indicate the amount of shared losses that must be paid in full to CMS within 90 days of receipt. CMS initiates payments to ACOs that have earned shared savings for a performance year in September of the year following the applicable performance year in order to pay with the correct fiscal year funds. Given that the timeline for conducting a MIPS targeted review of the MIPS performance feedback report may extend past the date that we issue unembargoed financial reconciliation reports, we may learn of errors in the calculation of MIPS Quality performance category scores after the issuance of initial determinations of financial performance under the Shared Savings Program.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we explained our belief that it would be appropriate to clarify how we would exercise our discretion to reopen for good cause in the event of errors in the MIPS Quality performance category scores, such as those identified through the MIPS targeted review process, that affect the determination of whether an ACO is eligible for shared savings, the amount of shared savings due to the ACO, or the amount of shared losses owed by the ACO. We explained that we are contemplating an approach under which we would reopen initial determinations of ACO financial performance to account for any corrections that have been made to MIPS Quality performance category scores that affect the determination of whether an ACO is eligible for shared savings 299 or the amount of shared savings or shared losses, with no restrictions on the magnitude of the error or the number of ACOs affected. Under this approach, the determination of whether there has been an error in the determination of a MIPS Quality performance category score that affects the determination of whether an ACO is eligible for shared savings, the amount of shared savings due to the ACO, or the amount of shared losses owed by the ACO; whether a correction would be warranted; and the timing of any correction would be within the sole discretion of CMS as provided in § 425.315(a)(4).

299 Unlike shared savings, the determination of whether an ACO is eligible for shared losses is not dependent upon whether the ACO meets the quality performance standard. If an ACO meets or exceeds the minimum loss rate, it will be responsible for sharing losses. See, for example, § 425.610(b)(3).

For illustrative purposes, we described how a correction to a MIPS Quality performance category score, based on a targeted review or other changes to the MIPS Quality performance category score, could affect the determination of whether an ACO is eligible for shared savings. In this example, an ACO participating under the BASIC track received an initial determination indicating that it met the MSR requirement and that it met the quality performance standard because it achieved a MIPS Quality performance category score that is equivalent to or higher than the percentile specified as the quality performance standard for that performance year. Because the ACO was otherwise eligible to share in savings for the performance year, CMS issued an initial determination that the ACO was eligible to share in savings at the maximum sharing rate under its track (or payment model within a track). Several weeks after that initial determination is issued, CMS learns of an error in the calculation of the MIPS Quality performance category scores that caused the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score to be higher than it would have been absent the error. As a result, the ACO's actual health equity adjusted quality performance score was less than the percentile specified as the quality performance standard for that performance year. In this example, we would exercise our discretion to reopen the determination of the ACO's financial performance for good cause to correct the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score. As a result of this correction, the ACO would no longer have a health equity adjusted quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the percentile specified as the quality performance standard for that performance year. Accordingly, the ACO would no longer meet the quality performance standard and thus would be ineligible for shared savings or alternatively might be eligible to receive a reduced shared savings payment in the event we finalize the proposed sliding scale approach.

Alternatively, a correction to a MIPS Quality performance category score could affect the amount of shared savings or shared losses owed to an ACO. For example, an ACO under the ENHANCED track might receive an initial determination indicating that it owes shared losses to CMS calculated at the maximum shared loss rate because it: (1) exceeded the minimum loss rate; and (2) it failed to meet the quality performance standard for that performance year. 300 Several months after that initial determination is issued, as a result of a MIPS targeted review, we learn of an error in the calculation of the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score that caused the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score to be lower than it would have been without the error. In this case, we would exercise our discretion to reopen the determination of the ACO's financial performance for good cause to correct the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score. In making this correction, the ACO now achieves a health equity adjusted quality performance score that causes it to meet the quality performance standard. While the ACO would still owe shared losses because it exceeded the minimum loss rate, the amount of shared losses it owes could be reduced based on the ACO's corrected health equity adjusted quality performance score as we would now determine the ACO's shared loss rate using a sliding scale approach.

300 Section 425.610(f)(2)(ii). Under the current regulations, an ENHANCED track ACO that is liable for losses and fails to meet the quality performance standard automatically faces the maximum shared loss rate of 75 percent, whereas an ACO that meets the quality performance standard would face a shared loss rate that is scaled by the ACO's quality performance (subject to a minimum and maximum rate). We note that in the event we finalize our proposal to extend the sliding scale approach to determining shared losses to ENHANCED track ACOs that achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set, a larger number of ACOs could potentially have their shared losses reduced as the result of a MIPS targeted review.

As we explained in the proposed rule, in the event that we learn of errors in the calculation of MIPS Quality performance category scores (from a MIPS targeted review or some other MIPS Quality performance category score-related corrections) that change the percentile score an ACO must achieve in order to meet the quality performance standard, we would exercise our discretion to reopen the initial determination of an ACO's financial performance for good cause to correct errors in the determination of whether an ACO is eligible for shared savings, the amount of shared savings due to the ACO, or the amount of shared losses owed by the ACO due to the miscalculation of MIPS Quality performance category scores. Moreover, as noted previously, if we determine that there is good cause to make a correction to a prior performance year's determination of ACO financial results as a result of corrections made to MIPS Quality performance category scores, we would seek to potentially adjust the shared savings payment to the ACO or any shared loss recoupment from the ACO for a subsequent performance year. This approach would not alter the current requirement that ACOs repay shared losses within 90 days after notification of the initial determination of shared losses.

As we stated in the proposed rule, we believe this approach is flexible and balanced and would allow us to exercise our discretion to reopen initial determinations of ACO financial performance for good cause to account for any corrections that have been made to MIPS Quality performance category scores that affect the determination of whether an ACO is eligible for shared savings, the amount of shared savings due to the ACO, or the amount of shared losses owed by the ACO. We also acknowledged that from year to year, corrections could sometimes advantage individual ACOs and sometimes disadvantage individual ACOs.

We sought comment on this clarification of the circumstances in which we would exercise our discretion to reopen for good cause when either an initial determination or a final agency determination regarding an ACO's financial performance needs to be corrected as a result of any corrections made to MIPS Quality performance category scores that affect the determination of whether an ACO is eligible for shared savings, the amount of shared savings due to the ACO, or the amount of shared losses owed by the ACO.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on this clarification and our responses:

Comment: Two commenters supported our clarification of the Shared Savings Program's authority to reopen for good cause an initial determination of an ACO's financial performance to correct errors in the determination of whether an ACO is eligible for shared savings, the amount of shared savings due to the ACO, or the amount of shared losses owed by the ACO due to the miscalculation of MIPS Quality performance category scores. Many commenters encouraged CMS to reconsider the approach discussed in the clarification and expressed concerns about the feasibility of returning savings to CMS and the disincentive that this would create for Shared Savings Program participation. These commenters recommended that if CMS continues with this approach, CMS should only reopen ACO financial determinations if the MIPS Quality performance category score error would result in a change that holds the ACO harmless (we understand this to refer to changes that do not result in the ACO returning funds to CMS or changes that do not reduce the amount of shared savings owed by CMS to the ACO), because it is unreasonable and not practical to expect ACOs to claw back savings from ACO participants after the funds have been distributed. One commenter explained that ACOs should not be penalized for errors that are discovered with MIPS Quality performance category scores after ACOs have already received initial financial reconciliation report calculations. Another commenter stated that while they understood the purpose of the approach discussed in the clarification, it creates uncertainty and instability in the program, which is counter to CMS' objectives to grow the program to include 100 percent of beneficiaries with original Medicare in a value-based care program by 2030.

Response: We acknowledge the concerns raised by commenters about the challenges that could arise if a correction to a MIPS Quality performance category score either reduces the amount of shared savings previously calculated for an ACO or increases the amount of shared losses owed to CMS by an ACO. As we discussed in the proposed rule, however, where possible we would seek to adjust the shared savings payment to the ACO or any shared loss recoupment from the ACO as part of the reconciliation for a subsequent performance year. For example, if an ACO that generated shared savings for the second performance year of its agreement period owed CMS money based on a correction made to the payment determination for the prior performance year, we might be able to deduct the amount owed prior to making the shared savings payment for the current year (subject to the general Shared Savings Program requirement for ACOs to repay monies owed to CMS within 90 days of notification of the obligation). We also explained that ACOs would not be able to delay recoupment of any payments owed by notifying us of a possible error that could merit reopening. Instead, we stated that if we later determine that a correction should be made, we would subsequently combine, if feasible, the revised calculation of shared savings or shared losses for the affected performance year with the financial reconciliation for the most recent performance year. We indicated that we expected to be able to provide ACOs with sufficient details regarding these corrections that they would be able to attribute the additional payment or recoupment arising from the reopening internally and, as applicable, distribute additional funds to or collect amounts from the appropriate ACO participants from the prior PY.

We believe this approach strikes an appropriate balance between important Medicare program integrity concerns that payments be made timely and accurately under the Shared Savings Program with our desire to minimize unnecessary operational burdens for ACOs and CMS, and to support the ACOs' ability to invest in additional improvements to increase quality and efficiency of care. Moreover, as discussed earlier in this section and in the proposed rule, the QPP issues MIPS performance feedback reports for the previous performance year prior to the release of the Shared Savings Program financial reconciliation reports (that incorporate MIPS Quality performance category scores). We intend to work with the QPP to identify potential errors to MIPS Quality performance category scores (through the MIPS targeted review process and other MIPS Quality performance category score-related corrections), so that we can resolve most, if not all, discrepancies or systemic issues prior to issuing the Shared Savings Program unembargoed financial reconciliation reports, which constitute the initial determination of the ACO's financial performance for the applicable performance year. Accordingly, we decline to adopt commenters' suggestions to reconsider the approach we discussed in the proposed rule.

Comment: Several commenters recommended that CMS place a limit on the length of time that can pass between the initial determination of an ACO's financial performance and any reopening to retroactively change ACO financial determinations. Most of these commenters suggested this time limit be 12 months, and one commenter suggested 60 days. One commenter stated that it is not feasible for CMS to reopen the determination of an ACO's financial performance two or more years after the performance year, which often happens with MIPS adjustments. The commenter explained that CMS already delays shared savings payments to ACOs by up to 10 months after the end of the performance year, so it would be highly impractical for CMS to hold ACOs accountable for MIPS errors that happen after the performance year reconciliation has occurred. The commenter emphasized that reopening financial determinations after the distribution of shared savings to participating physicians presents a very difficult operational issue for ACOs.

Response: We acknowledge the concerns raised by commenters and the recommendations to impose a limit on the timeframe within which CMS would be able reopen initial determinations of ACO financial performance to account for any corrections that have been made to MIPS Quality performance category scores that affect the determination of whether an ACO is eligible for shared savings, or the amount of shared savings or shared losses. As we explained in the proposed rule, however, under § 425.315, CMS may reopen the initial determination or a final agency determination under 42 CFR part 425 subpart I and issue a revised initial determination: (1) at any time in the case of fraud or similar fault as defined in § 405.902; or (2) not later than 4 years after the date of the notification to the ACO of the initial determination of savings or losses for the relevant performance year, for good cause. Moreover, the determination of whether there is good cause to reopen a payment determination is within the sole discretion of CMS as provided in § 425.315(a)(4) and any instances where it would be necessary to reopen an initial determination of an ACO's financial determination to correct MIPS Quality performance category scores would occur not later than 4 years after the date of the notification to the ACO of the initial determination, consistent with § 425.315(a)(1)(ii). Therefore, we decline commenters' suggestions to further limit the length of time that can pass between financial reconciliation and a reopening of the initial determinations of an ACO's financial determination. We may revisit our approach in future notice and comment rulemaking, after we gain additional experience with the interactions between MIPS and Shared Savings Program calculations and the timing and frequency of any reopenings.

Comment: Several commenters expressed concern that tying ACO quality performance thresholds to MIPS scores is inappropriate and makes unfair comparisons. These commenters urged CMS to adopt a different approach that does not tie Shared Savings Program quality performance determinations to MIPS quality performance category scores. Other commenters urged CMS to work closely with stakeholders in exploring alternative ways to align the timelines of MIPS errors reporting and ACO quality performance. One commenter mentioned that the MIPS program's error correction process under the QPP has not gone smoothly and the problems with that process should not be imported into financial reconciliation under the Shared Savings Program. Another commenter stated that it seems that either more alignment between the programs is needed to allow more time to complete the MIPS targeted review for MIPS before the Shared Savings Program issues initial determinations for financial reconciliation or there needs to be a separation between the programs for scoring purposes to resolve the issue of timing.

Response: We note this clarification is limited to the approach we will follow in using our discretion to reopen under the Shared Savings Program to revise the initial determination of an ACO's financial performance to reflect updated MIPS scoring information. We appreciate the commenters' suggestions that we explore alternative ways to align the timelines of MIPS errors reporting and ACO quality performance and to improve alignment between the programs. We may consider these suggestions in the development of policies for future notice and comment rulemaking.

f. Screening for Social Drivers of Health and Screen Positive Rate for Social Drivers of Health Measures and Future Measure Development—Request for Information (RFI)

In the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule, we solicited comments on addressing health disparities and promoting health equity (86 FR 39269 and 39270). We indicated our belief that assessing Shared Savings Program ACOs' quality performance on a broader population can have a positive impact on the quality of care for all groups, including Medicare beneficiaries (86 FR 39270). Additionally, we affirmed our expectation that the transition to all-payer eCQM/MIPS CQMs would help to address disparities and promote health equity by promoting a single standard of care across all patients receiving care from practices participating in Shared Savings Program ACOs regardless of location or racial/ethnic group (86 FR 39270). We sought comment and recommendations on how ACOs could utilize their resources to ensure all patients have access to equal care and how to improve the quality of care provided to certain communities, while addressing the disparities that currently exist in healthcare (86 FR 39270). Furthermore, we sought comment on how we could encourage health care providers serving vulnerable populations to participate in ACOs and other value-based care initiatives, including whether any adjustments should be made to quality measure benchmarks to take into account ACOs serving vulnerable populations (86 FR 39270).

We received many comments in support of CMS' commitment to advancing health equity and addressing health disparities within the Shared Savings Program, including several comments supporting stratification of data and quality measures by social risk factors such as race and ethnicity and inclusion of health equity measures in the program. In addition, we received some feedback expressing concerns that eCQM/MIPS CQM measures would divert resources into electronic systems instead of focusing on health equity. Commenters also noted that changes to the payment structure under the Shared Savings Program could help ACOs improve infrastructure to address health equity and disparities. As we stated in the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67872), our principal goal in selecting quality measures for the Shared Savings Program has been to identify measures of success in the delivery of high-quality health care at the individual and population levels, with a focus on outcomes.

Health equity and addressing health disparities continue to be high priorities for the agency through inclusion of health equity initiatives in CMS programs, and better addressing the social needs of people with Medicare is an important part of this strategy. Communities experiencing persistent poverty or inequality tend to disproportionately experience unmet social needs. 301 According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion's Healthy People 2030, which has a strong focus on eliminating health disparities and creating equitable opportunities for people to live healthy lives, social determinants of health have a major impact on people's health, well-being, and quality of life. This report cites safe housing, transportation, neighborhoods and access to nutritious foods as examples of social determinants of health. 302 For health care providers to help improve health outcomes by addressing these needs for people with Medicare, there is growing evidence to support screening patients for social needs, referring patients who screen positive to local community-based organizations that can help patients address these needs, and finally ensuring that follow-up is obtained and the social needs are addressed. In addition, screening patients for social needs would allow clinicians to develop treatment plans, if needed, which would better capture a patient's unique needs and priorities. 303

301 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Office of Minority Health, CMS Framework for Health Equity 2022-2032 (April 2022), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/cms-framework-health-equity.pdf .

302 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Healthy People 2030, refer to website https://health.gov/healthypeople/priority-areas/social-determinants-health .

303 AHRQ.gov, Identifying and Addressing Social Needs in Primary Care Settings, (2021), refer to https://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/evidencenow/tools-and-materials/social-needs-tool.pdf .

In the proposed rule, we sought comment on the potential future inclusion of two new structural measures in the APP measure set: Screening for Social Drivers of Health and Screen Positive Rate for Social Drivers of Health. The National Quality Forum (NQF) provided conditional support for these two measures during the 2021-2022 cycle and indicated the measures would be appropriate for consideration in the Shared Savings Program. 304 The measure Screening for Social Drivers of Health assesses the percentage at which providers screen their adult patients for food insecurity, housing instability, transportation problems, utility help needs, and interpersonal safety. This screening for health-related social needs is consistent with the priorities of the agency and the Shared Savings Program, including Meaningful Measures 2.0 priority areas specific to equity. Meaningful Measures 2.0 includes addressing measurement gaps such as development and implementation of measures that reflect social and economic determinants. 305

304 National Quality Forum, Measure Applications Partnership ( MAP ), 2021-2022 Considerations for Implementing Measures in Federal Programs: Clinician, Hospital, and Post-Acute Care Long-Term Care, final report (March 3, 2022), available at website https://www.qualityforum.org/Publications/2022/03/MAP_2021-2022_Considerations_for_Implementing_Measures_Final_Report_-_Clinicians,_Hospitals,_and_PAC-LTC.aspx .

305 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Meaningful Measures 2.0: Moving from Measure Reduction to Modernization, (2021), available at website https://www.cms.gov/meaningful-measures-20-moving-measure-reduction-modernization .

The measure Screening for Social Drivers of Health assesses the rate at which providers screen beneficiaries 18 years and older for food insecurity, housing instability, transportation problems, utility help needs, and interpersonal safety.

Below are the numerator and denominator for the measure:

• Numerator: The number of beneficiaries 18 and older screened for food insecurity, housing instability, transportation needs, utility assistance, and interpersonal violence.

• Denominator: The number of beneficiaries 18 and older in practice (or population).

We refer readers to IV.A.10.c.(1)(c)(i) of the proposed rule and Table Group A of Appendix 1 of the proposed rule, where we discuss the proposed health equity measure for purposes of MIPS, “Screening for Social Drivers of Health.” We refer readers to section IV.A.10.c.(1)(d) of the proposed rule for the request for information regarding measure development related to health equity under MIPS.

If the measure is adopted in the traditional MIPS program, we noted that we will consider proposing, in future rulemaking, the addition of this measure as an eCQM/MIPS CQM under the APP beginning in PY 2025, once the Web Interface reporting option sunsets and the transition to reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs is complete. It is important to note that the measure specifications are not being developed for electronic health record (EHR) reporting at this time, but would be considered for purposes of any future rulemaking.

Per the Measure Applications Partnership 2021-2022 Considerations for Implementing Measures in Federal Programs: Clinician, Hospital, and Post-Acute Care Long-Term Care final report, 306 this measure would also address a significant performance gap “in which 84 percent of physician offices do not screen for all five needs, even though approximately one-third of patients would screen positive for one or more social needs.” We believe the potential inclusion of this measure in the APP measure set reported by Shared Savings Program ACOs could advance health equity by ensuring ACO participants better understand the needs of the patients that they serve. We expect that, by screening for these social determinants of health, the ACO would accomplish the first step in helping people with Medicare address their social needs—understanding their needs. This screening would also enable clinicians to develop treatment plans, if needed, that are focused on beneficiaries' unique needs and priorities. We may consider including additional quality measures in the future that would assess how well ACOs address the social needs of Medicare beneficiaries more directly. We noted that any changes to the measures included in the APP measure set, including the addition of new measures, would be proposed through future rulemaking.

306 National Quality Forum, Measure Applications Partnership (MAP), 2021-2022 Considerations for Implementing Measures in Federal Programs: Clinician, Hospital, and Post-Acute Care Long-Term Care, final report (March 3, 2022), available at website https://www.qualityforum.org/Publications/2022/03/MAP_2021-2022_Considerations_for_Implementing_Measures_Final_Report_-_Clinicians,_Hospitals,_and_PAC-LTC.aspx .

We sought input on Screen Positive Rate for Social Drivers of Health, which assesses the percentage of patients who screened positive for health-related social needs. We also sought feedback from ACOs and other interested parties on the value of implementing a quality measure that indicates a patient's social needs as a part of the quality of care provided to them.

We solicited comments on the potential addition of these two social determinant of health measures to the APP measure set reported under the Shared Savings Program if these measures are adopted for the traditional MIPS program and other ways to incorporate health equity into public reporting. We also sought comment on the following:

• How to best implement the measures and how they could further drive health equity and health outcomes under the Shared Savings Program?

• What are the possible barriers to implementation of the measures in the Shared Savings Program?

• What impact would the implementation of these measures in the Shared Savings Program have on the quality of care provided for underserved populations?

• What type of flexibility with respect to the social screening tools should be considered should the measures be implemented? While supporting flexibility, how can we advance the use of standardized, coded health data within screening tools?

• Should the measures, if implemented in the future, be considered pay-for-reporting measures?

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 45860), we solicited comments on the inclusion of the Screening for Social Drivers of Health and Screen Positive Rate for Social Drivers of Health Measures in the APP measure set for ACOs. We also solicited comments on implementation best practices, barriers to implementation, impact of implementation, flexibilities that should be considered, and if the measures should be considered pay-for-reporting.

We appreciate the feedback we received in response to this comment solicitation. We may consider this information to inform future rulemaking.

g. Addition of New Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) for the Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) Survey Questions—Request for Information (RFI)

We sought to gather ACOs and other interested parties input on the potential and modified questions in the CAHPS for MIPS Survey pertaining to health disparities and price transparency, which would support implementation of the No Surprises Act. The No Surprises Act includes provisions specific to improvements in transparency and greater oversight of prescription drug and medical costs.

The CAHPS for MIPS Survey measures 10 key domains of patients' experience of care that are referred to as summary survey measures (SSMs) and include the following:

• Getting Timely Care, Appointments, and Information

• How Well Providers Communicate

• Patient's Rating of Provider

• Access to Specialists

• Health Promotion and Education

• Shared Decision Making

• Courteous and Helpful Office Staff

• Care Coordination

• Stewardship of Patient Resources

• Health Status and Functional Status

CAHPS surveys are an integral part of the Shared Savings Program's efforts to meaningfully assess patient experience and have been a requirement of the program since the November 2011 final rule establishing the Shared Savings Program (76 FR 67872). We stated in that final rule that we believe there is evidence that the CAHPS survey assesses important aspects of provider-patient interaction that can be influenced by an ACO's level of organizational support, training and incentive structure (76 FR 67874). In the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84722), we finalized that beginning in PY 2021, Shared Savings Program Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) are required to report quality data via the APP. As part of the APP, Shared Savings Program ACOs are required to administer the CAHPS for MIPS survey (85 FR 84730 through 84732).

The No Surprises Act, 307 which took effect on January 1, 2022, includes provisions such as billing protections for consumers covered under group and individual health plans, as well as certain improvements to transparency and oversight of prescription drug and medical costs (86 FR 36872). The No Surprises Act aligns with President Biden's goals of increased transparency, competition, and fairness across healthcare systems. 308 We are firmly committed to the advancement of the President's vision for health care and the resulting benefits, which include empowerment of consumers in making more informed and value-based health care decisions. We believe certain provisions of the No Surprises Act are relevant in consideration of the questions we are seeking input on for the CAHPS for MIPS survey. The Office of Personnel Management, the Internal Revenue Service, the Department of Labor, and CMS issued an interim final rule with comment period entitled “Requirements Related to Surprise Billing; Part 1”, which appeared in the July 13, 2021 Federal Register (86 FR 36872). This interim final rule notes that regulations promulgated under the No Surprises Act should ensure that all individuals, particularly those from underserved and minority communities, trust and believe information they receive related to healthcare costs and coverage (86 FR 36875). The agencies also note that regulations issued pursuant to the No Surprises Act should encourage regulated entities to address barriers to access of care, including trust concerns with the health care system, and to communicate with individuals in a language they can understand, in a respectful way that addresses cultural differences, and at an appropriate level of literacy (86 FR 36875).

307 Title I of Division BB of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, Public Law 116-260.

308 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, HHS Kicks Off New Year with New Protections from Surprise Medical Bills, (2022), available at website https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/hhs-kicks-new-year-new-protections-surprise-medical-bills .

As previously described in this section of the proposed rule, in developing policies for the Shared Savings Program, we are also committed to prioritizing the advancement of health equity through program initiatives with a focus on underserved populations, improving data collection and analysis on health disparities, and incorporating actionable measures addressing health disparities in future notice and comment rulemaking.

An article in the Journal of the American Medical Association titled Patient-Reported Experiences of Discrimination in the US Health Care System describes a cross-sectional national survey conducted in 2019 that included 3,253 US adults. This survey was designed to determine the prevalence, frequency and main types of discrimination experienced in the health care system. 309 Of the 2,137 survey respondents, 458 (21.4 percent) indicated they had experienced discrimination in the health care system, and 330 (72 percent) of those who had experienced discrimination reported experiencing it on more than one occasion. The most frequently reported type of discrimination experienced in the health care system was racial/ethnic discrimination, followed by educational or income level discrimination, weight, sex and age. According to the authors, the survey results suggested that health care discrimination experiences were more prevalent than previously recognized and a need existed for additional analysis of how discrimination related to structural inequities and social determinants of health.

309 Nong P, Raj M, Creary M, Patient-Reported Experiences of Discrimination in the US Health Care System, JAMA Network, (2020), available at https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamanetworkopen/fullarticle/2774166 .

One of the additional questions that we are considering adding to the CAHPS survey would be specific to health disparities and focuses on the patient's experience with discrimination based on the characteristics of the patient. We sought input on the following question: “In the last 6 months, did anyone from a clinic, emergency room, or doctor's office where you got care treat you in an unfair or insensitive way because of any of the following things about you? ” We noted the potential responses include; health condition, disability, age, culture, sex (including sexual orientation and gender identity) and income. We sought feedback on additional or modified potential response categories for this health disparities question. We noted that feedback received through the RFI, along with analysis and findings from the testing of the survey question in other programs and future testing in this program would be used to inform future rulemaking.

We also noted that we believe that the question aligns with the goals of the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program. Section 1899(b)(3)(C) of the Act provides that the Secretary shall establish quality performance standards to assess the quality of care furnished by ACOs, and the Secretary shall seek to improve the quality of care furnished by ACOs over time, in part, by specifying new measures. Inclusion of this question to the CAHPS for MIPS Survey would allow CMS to better understand the extent to which patients perceive discrimination in their health care, in alignment with HHS efforts to provide culturally and linguistically appropriate services (CLAS). The National CLAS Standards, were developed by the HHS Office of Minority Health and provide a blueprint for individuals and healthcare organizations to implement services that are respectful of health beliefs, practices and needs of diverse patients with the goal to advance health equity, improve quality of services and assist with elimination of disparities. 310 In addition, the Behavioral Health Implementation Guide for the National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services in Health and Health Care (Behavioral Health Guide) underscores the ways in which the National CLAS Standards can improve access to behavioral health care, promote quality behavioral health programs and practice, and ultimately reduce persistent disparities in mental health and substance use treatment for underserved minority communities. 311

310 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Minority Health, Cultural and Linguistic Competency, National CLAS Standards, (2021), available at website https://www.minorityhealth.hhs.gov/omh/browse.aspx?lvl=1&lvlid=6 .

311 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Minority Health, Behavioral Health Implementation Guide for the National Standards for Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate Services in Health and Health Care, available at https://www.minorityhealth.hhs.gov/Assets/PDF/clas%20standards%20doc_v06.28.21.pdf .

In addition, inclusion of a health disparities question in the CAHPS for MIPS survey would align with the five priorities outlined in the CMS Framework for Health Equity 2022-2032. 312 The priorities include both system and community level approaches for achievement of equity in Medicare and include:

312 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, CMS Framework for Health Equity, available at website https://www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Agency-Information/OMH/equity-initiatives/framework-for-health-equity . See also, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Office of Minority Health, CMS Framework for Health Equity 2022-2032 (April 2022), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/cms-framework-health-equity.pdf .

• Priority 1: Expand the Collection, Reporting and Analysis of Standardized Data;

• Priority 2: Assess Causes of Disparities Within CMS Programs and Address Inequities in Policies and Operations to Close Gaps;

• Priority 3: Build Capacity of Health Care Organizations and the Workforce to Reduce Health and Health Care Disparities;

• Priority 4: Advance Language Access, Health Literacy, and the Provision of Culturally Tailored Services; and

• Priority 5: Increase All Forms of Accessibility to Health Care Services and Coverage.

In addition, we noted that we believe that the inclusion of a health disparity question in the CAHPS for MIPS Survey would assist CMS in understanding the patient's perspective of their treatment during health care visits, as well as provide insight for health care providers on how to improve upon patient interactions, promotion of health equity and delivery of care. In addition, this question is already being tested in the Medicare Advantage program and based on the findings from this testing in the Medicare Advantage program, we may consider including this question in the CAHPS for MIPS survey through future rulemaking. Including the question in the CAHPS for MIPS survey would provide consistency across CMS programs in learning more about patient experiences with discrimination from various health care providers.

We also sought input on the addition of questions to the CAHPS for MIPS survey specific to price transparency. These questions would build upon the goals of the No Surprises Act to improve transparency and oversight of drug and medical costs, allowing patients to have more information on which to base their healthcare decisions. We also noted that the questions under consideration are patient focused, which is one of the goals of the CAHPS for MIPS survey. Currently, the CAHPS for MIPS survey includes the question “In the last 6 months, did you and anyone on your health care team talk about how much your prescription medicines cost?” 313 We considered adding a question that would be more general in nature and encompass additional areas of a patient's care, such as whether the patient talked with anyone on their health care team about the cost of health care services and equipment. An additional question or questions encompassing a patient's health care costs would allow us to better understand how extensively health care providers are considering and discussing costs with their patients, so they are more able to make informed health care decisions. We noted that we believe the inclusion of such questions would also support the goals of the Shared Savings Program which include promotion of accountability for patient populations and fostering coordination of items and services under Medicare Parts A and B. The program also encourages investment in infrastructure and redesigned care processes for high quality and efficient health care service delivery. ACOs work to reduce fragmentation in patient care and cost by giving their ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers the incentives and tools to deliver high-quality, coordinated, team-based care that proactively promotes improved health for all patients. 314

313 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2022 CAHPS for MIPS Survey Sample Copy, (2022), available at QPP Resource Library website https://qpp-cm-prod-content.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/1894/2022%20CAHPS%20for%20MIPS%20Survey%20Sample%20Copy.pdf .

314 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Affordable Care Act's Shared Savings Program Continues to Improve Quality of Care While Saving Medicare Money During COVID-19 Pandemic, (2021), available at website https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/affordable-care-acts-shared-savings-program-continues-improve-quality-care-while-saving-medicare .

We also noted that we considered revisions to the CAHPS for MIPS Survey measure in order to make it more broadly applicable to specialty groups in addition to primary care groups. In particular, we solicited public comment on shortening the survey to remove survey items that are relevant only to primary care providers. Alternately, we noted that we may create an alternate shortened survey version for specialty groups while maintaining the existing survey questions for primary care groups.

In summary, we sought information and feedback from commenters on: (1) the potential future inclusion of health disparities and price transparency questions and whether there are other questions that should also be considered for potential future inclusion in the CAHPS for MIPS survey; and (2) whether they have any input on creating a shortened version of the CAHPS for MIPS Survey measure such that it is more applicable to specialty groups. Feedback received through this RFI, along with analysis and findings from the testing of the survey questions in other programs and future testing in this program would be considered to inform future rulemaking, as previously indicated.

We appreciate the feedback we received in response to this comment solicitation. We may consider this information to inform future rulemaking.

5. Financial Methodology

a. Overview

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46157 through 46202), we proposed modifications to the financial methodologies used under the Shared Savings Program. We proposed a combination of modifications to the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology and financial models to encourage sustained participation by ACOs in the program and remove barriers for ACOs serving medically complex and low-income populations. Specifically, we proposed to revise the benchmarking methodology by: incorporating a prospective, external factor for updating the benchmark (section III.G.5.c.(3) of the proposed rule); adjusting rebased benchmarks to account for an ACO's prior savings (section III.G.5.c.(4) of the proposed rule); and reducing the impact of negative regional adjustments on ACO benchmarks (section III.G.5.c.(5) of the proposed rule). We also sought comment on alternatives to the combination of policies in sections III.G.5.c.(3) through (5) which would be aimed at addressing concerns about the effect of an ACO's assigned beneficiaries on regional FFS expenditures used in establishing, adjusting, updating, and resetting an ACO's historical benchmark (section III.G.5.c.(6) of the proposed rule). We also proposed changes to how we calculate regional factors used in benchmarking to reflect differences in prospective and preliminary prospective assignment (section III.G.5.d. of the proposed rule), how we conduct annual risk adjustment to better account for medically complex, high cost populations and to guard against coding initiatives (section III.G.5.e. of the proposed rule), and we proposed a methodology to increase opportunities for low revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track to share in savings (section III.G.5.f. of the proposed rule). We discussed ongoing considerations of the impact of the PHE for COVID-19 on ACO expenditures (section III.G.5.g. of the proposed rule), and we proposed to exclude from the determination of Medicare Parts A and B expenditures for purposes of calculations under the Shared Savings Program a proposed new supplemental payment under the IPPS for IHS/Tribal Hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico (section III.G.5.h. of the proposed rule). We concluded with a discussion of the proposed modifications to 42 CFR part 425, subpart G (section III.G.5.i. of the proposed rule), to incorporate the related proposed changes discussed throughout section III.G.5 of the proposed rule, as well as certain technical and conforming changes, and corrections. Within this section of this final rule we summarize and respond to public comments on these topics.

Comment: Some commenters expressed concern that several of the proposed changes to the financial methodology would only go into effect for ACOs entering a new agreement period in 2024 or a subsequent year. Many of these commenters suggested that CMS allow ACOs the option of opting into the proposed changes without having to complete the early renewal process or wait until they enter a new agreement period.

Response: We decline the commenters' suggestions. ACOs will be subject to the changes we are finalizing to the Shared Savings Program's financial methodology on an agreement period basis, unless specified otherwise. Specifically, the changes in the benchmarking methodology (as discussed in sections III.G.5.c-e of this final rule) and to allow for increased opportunities for low revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track to share in savings (as discussed in section III.G.5.f of this final rule) will be applicable to ACOs entering a new agreement period beginning on or after January 1, 2024. However, as discussed in section III.G.5.h of this final rule, the policies we are finalizing to account for supplemental payment to IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico in expenditure and revenue calculations under the Shared Savings Program will be applicable to all ACOs for the performance year beginning January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years.

We believe the timing of applicability for the benchmarking changes will allow sufficient time for current ACOs to decide whether to renew for a new agreement period under the Shared Savings Program, for providers/suppliers to consider the business case for forming or joining a Shared Savings Program ACO, and for CMS to prepare to implement these changes.

Further, we do not believe it is desirable to implement an approach that would allow each ACO to select from a menu of options for customizing the benchmark methodology that would apply in any given performance year during an agreement period. An approach that allows an ACO to choose the more favorable of several methodologies for establishing its cost target would exacerbate our concerns about the potential for benchmarks to become overly inflated to the point where ACOs need to do little to maintain or change their care practices to generate savings. We are concerned that this flexibility could lead to opportunities for arbitrage and may dull incentives for ACOs to improve their performance under the Shared Savings Program. Further, doing so would introduce considerable operational complexity into the program's benchmarking methodology.

As the commenters point out, ACOs have the option to “early renew”, meaning to terminate their current participation agreement under § 425.220 and immediately enter a new agreement period to continue participation in the Shared Savings Program. (See paragraph (2) of the definition of “renewing ACO” in § 425.20, and 83 FR 67885 through 67890, and the application procedures set forth in § 425.224.) Early renewal would allow a currently participating ACO to be subject to the modified financial methodology policies applicable to agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, sooner than if the ACO were to wait to renew to continue its participation in the Shared Savings Program after completing its current agreement period of at least 5 years. We note that early renewing, like renewing upon completion of an agreement period, will result in rebasing of the ACO's historical benchmark, and will affect the ACO's eligibility for certain participation options (refer to section III.G.2. of this final rule), as well as the agreement period the ACO is entering for purposes of applying program requirements that phase-in over multiple agreement periods (refer to § 425.600(f)).

Comment: One commenter supported several of the proposed changes to the financial methodology, but expressed concern over the Shared Savings Program becoming increasingly complex and changing frequently. The commenter expressed concern that this could create a barrier to participation in the Shared Savings Program as sophisticated modeling is necessary to determine if an ACO has a chance for success in the program.

Response: The financial methodology changes we proposed primarily build on the current Shared Savings Program policies. We do not believe that the changes to the financial methodology we are finalizing in this final rule create additional complexity that will create barriers to participation in the Shared Savings Program, and we remain committed to updating our specifications documents, programmatic resources, and other materials to support ACOs in understanding the financial methodology that is applicable to their agreement period, and to provide ACOs with aggregate reports and beneficiary-identifiable claims data, in accordance with the requirements specified in 42 CFR part 425 subpart H, to support ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program.

Further, as explained in section III.G.1.a of this final rule, we are balancing incentives and participation options to serve a dual purpose of sustaining participation by existing ACOs and increasing program growth, recognizing that ACOs vary in their composition of providers/suppliers, the needs of the populations they serve, and have varying degrees of efficiency relative to their region and experience with accountable care initiatives. We proposed modifications to strengthen financial incentives for long term participation in the Shared Savings Program by reducing the impact of ACOs' performance and market penetration on their benchmarks, and to support the business case for ACOs serving high risk and high dually eligible populations to participate. We continue to believe that such policies will help sustain current participation and grow the Shared Savings Program, which in turn will outweigh any potential drawbacks of making these changes, such as additional programmatic complexity.

b. Statutory and Regulatory Background on Establishing and Updating the Benchmark and Determining Savings

Section 1899(d)(1)(B)(i) of the Act specifies that, in each year of the agreement period, an ACO is eligible to receive payment for shared savings only if the estimated average per capita Medicare expenditures under the ACO for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for Parts A and B services, adjusted for beneficiary characteristics, is at least the percent specified by the Secretary below the applicable benchmark under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act. Section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act addresses how ACO benchmarks are to be established and updated under the Shared Savings Program. This provision specifies that the Secretary shall estimate a benchmark for each agreement period for each ACO using the most recent available 3 years of per beneficiary expenditures for Parts A and B services for Medicare FFS beneficiaries assigned to the ACO. This benchmark shall be adjusted for beneficiary characteristics and such other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate and updated by the projected absolute amount of growth in national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program, as estimated by the Secretary. The benchmark shall be reset at the start of each agreement period. In addition to the statutory benchmarking and savings determination methodology established in section 1899(d) of the Act, section 1899(i)(3) of the Act grants the Secretary the authority to use other payment models, including payment models that would use alternative benchmarking and savings determination methodologies, if the Secretary determines that doing so would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare program and that the alternative methodology would result in program expenditures equal to or lower than those that would result under the statutory payment model.

The rules governing the benchmarking calculations and determination of shared savings and losses are set forth in the regulations at 42 CFR part 425, subpart G. In the November 2011 final rule establishing the Shared Savings Program, we adopted policies for establishing, updating, and resetting the benchmark at § 425.602. The Shared Savings Program's regulations have since evolved to include different benchmarking methodologies, including modifications to § 425.602, and the addition of separate benchmarking policies for ACOs entering a second or subsequent agreement period at § 425.603. Benchmarking policies applicable to all ACOs in agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years, are specified in § 425.601. We refer readers to discussions of the benchmark calculations in earlier rulemaking for details on the development of the current policies (see November 2011 final rule, 76 FR 67909 through 67927; June 2015 final rule, 80 FR 32785 through 32796; June 2016 final rule, 81 FR 37953 through 37991; and December 2018 final rule, 83 FR 68005 through 68030).

Calculations related to determination of shared savings and shared losses are specified in § 425.605 for ACOs participating under the BASIC track, and § 425.610 for ACOs participating under the ENHANCED track (formerly referred to as Track 3). In the June 2015 final rule, CMS established Track 3, constituting the program's highest level of risk and potential reward (80 FR 32771 through 32781). In the December 2018 final rule, CMS renamed Track 3 the ENHANCED track (see, for example, 83 FR 67841), and established the BASIC track, which includes a glide path with five Levels (A through E) (83 FR 67841 through 67857). The BASIC track's glide path allows eligible ACOs to begin under a one-sided model and incrementally advance to higher levels of risk and reward. We refer the reader to earlier rules for details on the development of the current policies for determining shared savings and losses under the BASIC track and ENHANCED track.

In the May 8, 2020, COVID-19 IFC (85 FR 27578 through 27582), we established adjustments to benchmark and performance year expenditure calculations to address the COVID-19 pandemic as specified under § 425.611. In the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84771 through 84785), we summarized and responded to public comments received on these adjustments, and finalized the regulation at § 425.611 with modifications.

Details on the Shared Savings Program's financial methodology are included in Specifications documents. Refer to the Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses and Assignment Methodology Specifications (version #10, January 2022), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-1 . For details on Shared Savings Program policies to address the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting public health emergency (PHE), refer to the Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses and Assignment Methodology, Specifications of Policies to Address the Public Health Emergency for COVID-19 (December 2020), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf .

c. Strengthening Participation by Reducing the Effect of ACO Performance on Historical Benchmarks, Addressing Market Penetration, and Strengthening Incentives for ACOs Serving Medically Complex and High Cost of Care Populations

(1) Regulatory Background

To establish an ACO's historical benchmark for an agreement period, CMS uses ACO historical expenditures for beneficiaries that would have been assigned to the ACO in the 3 most recent years prior to the start of the agreement period. As the statute requires the use of historical expenditures to establish an ACO's benchmark, the per capita costs for each benchmark year must be trended forward to current year dollars and then a weighted average is used to obtain the ACO's historical benchmark. Section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act also requires that the benchmark shall be updated by the projected absolute amount of growth in national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program. Therefore, in the November 2011 final rule establishing the Shared Savings Program, we adopted policies for trending forward expenditures for benchmark year (BY) 1 and BY2 to BY3 dollars (76 FR 67924 and 67925), and for updating the benchmark for each performance year during the ACO's agreement period (76 FR 67925 through 67927).

Over the 10 years since the Shared Savings Program was first established, we have used a variety of approaches for determining the trend and update factors to make an ACO's cost target more independent of its own expenditures, including using factors based on national expenditures, regional expenditures, or both. With these approaches, we have maintained a degree of parity between the factors used to trend and update the benchmark, either based on national FFS expenditures, regional FFS expenditures, or a blend of national and regional FFS expenditures.

In the November 2011 final rule establishing the Shared Savings Program, we adopted policies at § 425.602 establishing trend and update factors based on national FFS expenditures (76 FR 67924 through 67927). We finalized use of a national growth rate in Medicare Parts A and B expenditures for FFS beneficiaries for trending forward BY1 and BY2 to BY3 dollars. We also finalized use of a flat dollar equivalent of the projected absolute amount of growth in national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the Original Medicare FFS program to update the benchmark for each performance year of the agreement period. We described our belief that using a trend factor based on a national growth rate in Medicare Parts A and B expenditures and an update factor calculated as a flat dollar amount equivalent of the projected absolute amount of growth in national FFS expenditures provides a relatively higher expenditure benchmark for low growth/low spending ACOs and a relatively lower benchmark for high growth/high spending ACOs. ACOs in high cost high growth areas would therefore have an incentive to reduce their rate of growth to bring their costs more in line with the national average; while ACOs in low cost low growth areas would have an incentive to maintain or improve their overall lower spending levels (76 FR 67924 through 67927).

In the June 2015 final rule, we adopted policies for resetting the benchmark for ACOs entering a second agreement period in 2016 at § 425.603(b) (80 FR 32786 through 32796). These policies addressed concerns about the use of an ACO's prior performance years as benchmark years in second and subsequent agreement periods 315 by weighting each benchmark year equally and incorporating an adjustment to account for the average per capita amount of savings generated during the ACO's prior agreement period. We refer to this adjustment as a “prior savings adjustment.” We believed that incorporating a prior savings adjustment into the benchmarking methodology for renewing ACOs entering a second agreement period in 2016 would encourage ongoing program participation by ACOs that had lowered expenditures during their first agreement period. We noted that absent this adjustment, an ACO that previously achieved success in the program may elect to terminate its participation in the program rather than face a lower benchmark that reflects the lower costs for its patient population during the performance years of its prior agreement period (80 FR 32788 through 32791). When proposing this policy in the December 2014 proposed rule (79 FR 72838 and 72839), we highlighted the advantages of the prior savings adjustment, including increasing incentives for ACOs to remain in the program and continue generating shared savings and improving quality due to the prospect of a higher benchmark in future agreement periods. Furthermore, we hypothesized that adjusting benchmarks for prior performance would increase the likelihood of ACOs entering two-sided risk models. The prior savings adjustment adopted in the June 2015 final rule applied only to ACOs entering a second agreement period beginning in 2016 because we subsequently finalized an alternative methodology incorporating factors based on regional FFS expenditures to establish, adjust and update the benchmark for ACOs beginning a second or subsequent agreement period in 2017 and later years.

315 79 FR 72835 and 72836.

In the June 2016 final rule (81 FR 37953 through 37991), we modified the benchmarking methodology to finalize an approach that incorporated factors based on regional FFS expenditures when resetting (or rebasing) and updating ACO historical benchmarks, as specified in § 425.603(c) through (f). We replaced the national trend factor used in the rebasing methodology with a methodology incorporating regional trend factors. This revised rebasing methodology applied beginning in 2017 to determine rebased historical benchmarks for ACOs renewing for a second or subsequent agreement period under the Shared Savings Program. We also adopted a phased approach to adjusting the rebased benchmark to reflect a percentage of the difference between an ACO's historical expenditures and FFS expenditures in the ACO's regional service area. A higher percentage would be used in calculating this regional adjustment to the ACO's rebased historical benchmark for the ACO's third agreement period (or fourth agreement period for ACOs that entered a second agreement period in 2016) and all subsequent agreement periods. The finalized methodology also included an annual update to the rebased benchmark to account for changes in regional FFS spending, replacing the update based solely on the absolute amount of projected growth in national FFS spending. We finalized an approach to calculate regional FFS expenditures, which included defining an ACO's regional service area to include all counties where one or more beneficiaries assigned to the ACO reside, calculating risk-adjusted county FFS expenditures for the ACO's regional service area using the assignable beneficiary population residing in each of the counties included in the ACO's regional service area, and weighting county-level FFS costs by the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries in the county. The approach adopted in the June 2016 final rule was designed to address concerns about an ACO's influence on its historical benchmark by making the ACO's cost target more independent of its historical expenditures and more reflective of FFS spending in its region by incorporating regional expenditures into the determination of an ACO's historical benchmark and applying a methodology for risk adjustment that accounted for the health status of the ACO's assigned population in relation to FFS beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area. This approach, which was sunset through subsequent rulemaking that was finalized in December 2018, applied to determine the rebased historical benchmark for ACOs that renewed their participation agreement for a second agreement period beginning on January 1, 2017, January 1, 2018, or January 1, 2019.

In the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68005 through 68030), we adopted policies at § 425.601 that expanded the use of regional factors in establishing, adjusting, and resetting historical benchmarks to all ACOs, including ACOs in a first agreement period, for agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, or in subsequent years. These policies sought to address concerns about ACOs influencing their own regional trends by using a blend of national and regional trend factors to trend forward BY1 and BY2 to BY3 when determining the historical benchmark under § 425.601(a)(5) and a blend of national and regional update factors to update the historical benchmark to the performance year under § 425.601(b) (83 FR 68024 through 68030). Under this approach, the weight applied to the national component of the blended trend and update factors increases with an ACO's penetration in its regional service area. We also finalized changes to limit the magnitude of the regional adjustment to address CMS' concerns about windfall gains for low-spending ACOs and to reduce disincentives for ACOs serving medically complex patients (83 FR 68017 through 68024). Specifically, we established a symmetrical cap on the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark equal to positive or negative 5 percent of the national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for each enrollment type. We also modified the schedule of weights used to phase in the regional adjustment at § 425.601(f), to reduce the maximum weight from 70 to 50 percent for all ACOs and to slow the phase-in of weights for ACOs with higher spending than their regional service area.

In earlier rulemaking, we have acknowledged that the use of factors based on regional FFS expenditures in calculating benchmarks will have varying effects on ACOs depending on each organization's individual circumstances (see, for example, 81 FR 37954 through 37957, and 81 FR 37975 through 37977; also 83 FR 68017 and 68026).

(2) Overview of Considerations for Modification to the Benchmarking Methodology

In the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39291 through 39295), we summarized select aspects of the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology and related concerns that have been expressed by ACOs and other interested parties and solicited comments. We discussed some of our considerations based on our initial analyses of these concerns about the methodology for calculating regional FFS expenditures used in certain benchmark calculations, specifically the regional adjustment and the blended national-regional growth rates used in trending and updating the benchmark. We sought comment on possible approaches for removing an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the assignable beneficiary population used in the regional expenditure calculations to address concerns raised by ACOs and other interested parties that the current approach results in relatively lower benchmarks for ACOs, particularly ACOs with high market penetration in their regional service area, which they suggest may tend to be rural ACOs (86 FR 39292). In the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39293), we noted the potential, based on initial simulations, for mixed effects on ACOs from modifications to the benchmark methodology to remove the ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the calculation of regional FFS expenditures. We also specified that it would be important to consider the extent to which market penetration should be considered in benchmark calculations, noting that relatively few ACOs have high market shares (86 FR 39293). We also sought comment on alternative benchmarking methodologies that may incorporate data sources other than Medicare FFS expenditure trends, such as by incorporating factors based on Medicare Advantage rates, or other published trends (86 FR 39294). We sought comment on alternate approaches to updating the historical benchmark, noting that in order for us to use our authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to implement payment methodologies that diverge from the requirements of section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act, those payment methodologies must be determined to improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries without resulting in additional program expenditures (86 FR 39294).

In the section of the CY 2022 PFS final rule entitled “Comments on Considerations Related to the Use of Regional FFS Expenditures and the Risk Adjustment Methodology in Establishing, Adjusting, Updating, and Resetting the ACO's Historical Benchmark” (86 FR 65295 through 65306), we summarized comments received, and noted that we would take these comments into consideration as we contemplate additional refinements to the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodologies. We noted that we would propose any specific policy changes, if deemed appropriate, in future notice and comment rulemaking. In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we included select information on the comments received in response to the discussion in the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule and previously summarized, and referred readers to the aforementioned section of the CY 2022 PFS final rule for more complete summaries of commenters' suggestions.

Several commenters, including MedPAC, did not support removing ACO assigned beneficiaries from the regional FFS expenditure calculations (86 FR 65298). MedPAC expressed concern this would reward historically low spending ACOs without improving their efficiency of care while at the same time further reducing participation incentives among high spending ACOs that were likely to have the greatest opportunity for efficiency improvements. 316 Many commenters favored removing ACO assigned beneficiaries from the regional reference population (86 FR 65298 through 65302), with some commenters suggesting this approach in combination with other modifications to the benchmarking methodology, such as to expand the definition of regional service area, or to modify the blended national-regional growth factors used in trending and updating the ACO's historical benchmark. Some commenters sought clarity on the approach that would be used to remove an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the assignable population of beneficiaries used to determine regional FFS expenditures given anticipated mixed effects on ACOs, including the impact on ACOs serving patients with high costs of care (86 FR 65298). Commenters offered differing perspectives on unintended consequences that could result from removing ACO assigned beneficiaries from regional FFS expenditures, with some commenters suggesting that this could also inadvertently increase incentives for patient selection and market consolidation (86 FR 65300 and 65301). Commenters offered a variety of alternative approaches (86 FR 65301 and 65302). For example, MedPAC suggested that ACOs selecting prospective assignment be offered a trend factor that is set prospectively prior to the start of the performance year and developed utilizing local and national estimates as is already done for benchmarking under the Global and Professional Direct Contracting Model (to be redesigned and renamed as the ACO Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (REACH) Model beginning January 1, 2023). 317

316 Letter from MedPAC to Chiquita Brooks-LaSure, Administrator, CMS (September 9, 2021), regarding File code CMS-1751-P, available at https://www.regulations.gov/comment/CMS-2021-0119-26001 .

317 We note that the Global and Professional Direct Contracting Model has gained experience using a prospectively set trend factor utilizing local and national estimates as part of benchmarking; this element of the benchmarking methodology will continue when the model transitions to the redesigned ACO REACH Model on January 1, 2023.

As we explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46160), we have continued to investigate the commenters' concerns and consider their suggestions, and have performed additional modeling and analysis. We take seriously ACOs' and other interested parties' concerns about the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology. In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we proposed modifications to the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology to address three core concerns (or dynamics):

• How to ensure rebased benchmarks remain accurate and serve as a reasonable baseline, when benchmark years correspond to performance years of the ACO's preceding agreement period, requiring ACOs to continually beat their own performance (also referred to as a “ratchet effect”).

• How to address a single ACO's or multiple ACOs' collective effects on their own regional expenditures, which are used to calculate the regional adjustment and the regional portion of the trend and update factors.

• How to ensure the benchmarking methodology results in benchmarks of sufficient value to encourage program entry and continued participation by ACOs, ACO participants, and ACO providers/suppliers serving medically complex, high cost populations, and to address selective participation in the program by ACOs, ACO participants, and ACO providers/suppliers resulting from the program's benchmarking methodology.

As indicated in the regulatory background in section III.G.5.c.(1) of this final rule, we have taken incremental steps to address these dynamics through previous rulemaking, such as: using factors based on regional FFS expenditures to trend and update the ACO's rebased historical benchmark instead of a prior savings adjustment, followed by modifications to use blended national-regional growth factors in trending and updating the ACO's historical benchmark beginning with the ACO's first agreement period; incorporating a regional adjustment to the benchmark in the rebasing methodology, followed by modifications to apply the regional adjustment beginning with the ACO's first agreement period, and to adjust the phase-in of weights used in determining the regional adjustment over time; and modifying the risk adjustment methodology to account for changes in severity and case mix of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries during the performance year. While these approaches have made some progress to address the aforementioned dynamics, as discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we continue to receive feedback from ACOs and other interested parties that additional modifications to the benchmarking methodology are needed to further reduce impacts from rebasing and the regional effects of increasing market penetration by ACOs, and to support ACOs, and in particular ACOs serving medically complex, high cost populations, as they work to achieve the program's goal of lowering growth in Medicare FFS expenditures.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46161), we explained that there is some evidence that certain aspects of the program's benchmarking methodology, notably the regional adjustment to the benchmark, may already deter participation among ACOs with spending above their regional benchmark and those serving medically complex, high cost populations. For example, in PYs 2017 through 2019, just over 80 percent of ACOs subject to a regional adjustment received a positive adjustment, indicating their spending was lower than spending in their regional service area. More recently, the share of ACOs receiving a positive regional adjustment is closer to 90 percent. This pattern suggests selective participation behavior, where ACOs that have already achieved efficiency or that are serving beneficiaries with lower health risks are more likely to participate. Providers with the greatest opportunity to reduce spending (those that are inefficient and high spending relative to their region and that would receive a negative regional adjustment if they formed an ACO) are less likely to participate under the current methodology, limiting savings for the Medicare program. Additional analysis has suggested that ACOs receiving the largest negative regional adjustments tend to be those serving beneficiaries with high average risk scores and/or high proportions of beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. This further suggests that these ACOs may be higher cost relative to their regions as a result of caring for the highest needs populations rather than being inefficient, and that ACOs serving medically complex, high cost populations may have more difficulty participating in the Shared Savings Program.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46161), we explained our belief that addressing the concerning dynamics in the benchmarking methodology, combined with modifications to the risk adjustment methodology and to participation options targeted at improving participation by ACOs serving medically complex, high cost populations, 318 would further CMS' goal that 100 percent of people with Original Medicare will be in a care relationship with accountability for quality and total cost of care by 2030. 319 This goal informed our consideration of how to approach potential modifications to the benchmarking methodology, and in particular motivated us to consider approaches that would allow for a potentially significant increase in participation in the Shared Savings Program.

318 The proposed modifications to the risk adjustment methodology targeted at supporting ACOs serving medically complex, high cost populations are described in section III.G.5.e of this final rule. Our proposed modifications to participation options targeted at ACOs serving underserved populations, and providing a longer on-ramp to performance-based risk for certain ACOs are described in section III.G.2 of this final rule.

319 Seshamani M, Fowler E, Brooks-LaSure C. Building On The CMS Strategic Vision: Working Together For A Stronger Medicare. Health Affairs. January 11, 2022. Available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/forefront.20220110.198444 .

We also noted our consideration of additional modifications to the Shared Savings Program benchmarking methodology that may be needed to ensure the program's longer-term sustainability. MedPAC discussed ratchet effects from rebasing and ACOs' affecting their own regional expenditures in its November 2021 public meetingthnsp; 320 and January 2022 public meeting. 321 Many of the commissioners appeared to support a longer-term approach under which CMS would update ACOs' benchmarks annually using “exogenous” factors, meaning factors not impacted by the individual or collective performance of ACOs. This approach, which has been referred to as “administratively set benchmarks”, would use a combination of administratively determined factors and projected growth in volume and intensity of FFS services, to account for whether an ACO is high or low spending relative to its region. However, at least one commissioner questioned using a projected trend when the actual trend is available and, in their view, has served the program well. 322 In its June 2022 Report to the Congress, MedPAC formally recommended the administratively set benchmarks approach. 323 In section III.G.7. of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46208 through 46218), we described and sought comment on a potential longer-term approach for use of administratively set benchmarks that are decoupled from ongoing observed FFS spending.

320 Serna L and Stensland J. MedPAC. Presentation on benchmark incentives for accountable care organizations (November 8, 2021), available at https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/aco-benchmarks-medpac-nov-2021.pdf .

321 Burton R et al. MedPAC. Presentation on developing a multi-track population-based payment model with administratively updated benchmarks (January 14, 2022), available at https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/APM-MedPAC-Jan22.pdf .

322 See, for example, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, Public Meeting, Friday, January 14, 2022, transcript of proceedings starting at 10:02 a.m., available at https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Jan22_MedPAC_Meeting_Transcript_SEC.pdf (refer to pages 166-246, enumerated pages 3-83).

323 Medicare Payment Advisory Commission. June 2022 Report to the Congress: Medicare and the Health Care Delivery System (June 15, 2022), available at https://www.medpac.gov/document/june-2022-report-to-the-congress-medicare-and-the-health-care-delivery-system/ (Chapter 1, pages 3-22).

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we proposed a combination of policies to ensure a robust benchmarking methodology that would reduce the effect of ACO performance on ACO historical benchmarks and increase options for ACOs caring for high-risk populations. Specifically, we proposed to modify the methodology for updating the historical benchmark (section III.G.5.c.(3) of the proposed rule), incorporate a prior savings adjustment in historical benchmarks for renewing and re-entering ACOs (section III.G.5.c.(4) of the proposed rule), and modify the negative regional adjustment (section III.G.5.c.(5) of the proposed rule). We also noted our belief that these proposed modifications could serve as “stepping stones” to a potential longer-term approach to the benchmarking methodology, and indicated that they were designed to be consistent with the potential approach for incorporating a methodology for administratively set benchmarks, which was described in the request for information in section III.G.7. of the proposed rule. In section III.G.5.c.(6) of the proposed rule, we also sought comment on two potential alternatives to the package of policies we proposed in sections III.G.5.c.(3) through (5). As explained in the proposed rule, both alternatives would seek to limit the impact of an ACO's own assigned beneficiaries on the regional factors used in benchmarking calculations. While these alternatives would address concerns raised by some interested parties, we noted that we believed they would be less effective than our proposed policies at addressing the full set of core concerns we articulated in section III.G.5.c of the proposed rule.

(3) Incorporating a Prospective, External Factor in Growth Rates Used To Update the Historical Benchmark

(a) Background

As described in the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68024 through 68030), we used our statutory authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to adopt the policy under which we update the historical benchmark using a blend of national and regional growth rates, rather than the projected absolute amount of growth in national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program as required under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act. In accordance with § 425.601(b), for agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years, we update the historical benchmark for an ACO for each performance year using a blend of national and regional growth rates between BY3 and the performance year. To update the benchmark, we make separate calculations for expenditure categories for each of the following populations of beneficiaries based on Medicare enrollment type: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, aged/non-dual eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

The national-regional blend is a weighted average of national FFS and regional growth rates between BY3 and the performance year for the applicable Medicare enrollment type. The national growth rates are computed using CMS OACT national Medicare expenditure data for BY3 and the performance year for assignable beneficiaries (as defined at § 425.20) identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to each year. Regional growth rates are computed using expenditures for the ACO's regional service area for BY3 and the performance year. To calculate regional expenditures, we determine the counties included in the ACO's regional service area based on the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for the year, and determine the ACO's regional expenditures as specified under § 425.601(c) and (d).

The national and regional growth rates are blended together by taking a weighted average of the two. The weight assigned to the national component of the national-regional blend for a given Medicare enrollment type is calculated as the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO for the applicable performance year, calculated by taking a weighted average of county-level shares as specified in § 425.601(a)(5)(v). To calculate this share, we first calculate the county-level share of assignable beneficiaries that are assigned to the ACO for each county in the ACO's regional service area for that Medicare enrollment type. We then weight the county-level shares according to the ACO's proportion of assigned beneficiaries in the county, determined by the number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in the county in relation to the ACO's total number of assigned beneficiaries for that Medicare enrollment type. Next, we sum these weighted county-level shares for all counties in the ACO's regional service area for each Medicare enrollment type.

As an ACO's penetration in its region increases, a higher weight is placed on the national component of the national-regional blend and a lower weight on the regional component. The national and regional growth rates are blended together by taking a weighted average of the two. Specifically, for each Medicare enrollment type, the national-regional blended growth rate is equal to the sum of the following: (1) the growth rate for national assignable FFS expenditures for BY3 to the performance year multiplied by the weight assigned to the national component; and (2) the average growth rate for regional FFS expenditures for BY3 to the performance year based on the ACO's regional service area multiplied by the weight assigned to the regional component. In accordance with § 425.601(a)(5), we also use blended national-regional growth rates to trend forward expenditures for each benchmark year (BY1 and BY2) to BY3 dollars, making separate calculations for each Medicare enrollment type.

We summarized concerns with the current benchmarking approach in section III.G.5.c.(2) of the proposed rule (87 FR 46159 through 46162). Specifically, ACOs and other interested parties have expressed concerns regarding the dynamic under which an ACO that reduces costs for its own assigned beneficiaries also reduces its average regional costs, resulting in a relatively lower benchmark for the ACO under the blended national-regional growth rates used to trend and update the ACO's historical benchmark. As echoed in public comments, ACOs and other interested parties have suggested that this dynamic particularly disadvantages ACOs with high market penetration in their regional service areas, which may tend to be ACOs operating in rural areas (see, for example, 86 FR 65296 through 65299).

(b) Revisions

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46162 through 46169), we proposed to incorporate a prospectively projected administrative growth factor, a variant of the United States Per Capita Cost (USPCC) that we refer to as the Accountable Care Prospective Trend (ACPT), into a three-way blend with national and regional growth rates to update an ACO's historical benchmark for each performance year in the ACO's agreement period. Incorporating this prospective trend in the update to the benchmark would insulate a portion of the annual update from any savings occurring as a result of the actions of ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program and address the impact of increasing market penetration by ACOs in a regional service area on the existing blended national-regional growth factor. Because the ACPT would be prospectively set at the outset of an agreement period, any savings generated by ACOs during the agreement period would not be reflected in the ACPT. Accordingly, incorporation of the ACPT would allow for benchmarks to increase beyond actual spending growth rates as ACOs slow spending growth. By limiting the negative feedback of efforts by ACOs to slow spending growth on their own benchmarks, we noted that we believed the use of this three-way blend to update ACOs' benchmarks would incentivize both greater savings by ACOs and greater program participation. Because incorporating the ACPT into the update would reduce the degree to which an ACO's savings negatively impact its benchmark through the regional trend component of the update, we also believed that the proposed change to the update methodology would help to address the concerns discussed in section III.G.5.c.(2) of this final rule regarding the disproportionate impact of an ACO's savings on the benchmark update for ACOs with high market share.

We did not propose to revise the methodology used to trend forward per capita expenditures from BY1 and BY2 to BY3, but indicated our intent to maintain the current two-way blend used in calculating the ACO's benchmark. We acknowledged that modifying the methodology for determining the update factor but not the trend factor would mean there would no longer be parity between these factors, but noted that we believed this would be an appropriate departure from the approach we have maintained since the start of the program. The two-way blend used for trend factors would continue to reflect actual growth rates, which we believed would still be appropriate for purposes of determining the historical benchmark because the benchmark is intended to reflect historical spending prior to any savings achieved during the agreement period for which the benchmark will be used. In contrast, we explained that the proposal to use a three-way blend to update the benchmark would incorporate a projected growth rate, the ACPT, which would reflect increases in spending independent of any savings achieved by the ACO, or ACOs collectively, during the agreement period, thus limiting the extent to which ACOs' success in reducing expenditures for their assigned beneficiaries over the course of an agreement period negatively impacts their ability to share in savings during that agreement period. We also explained that we believed this proposed change to the update factor would incent ACOs to reduce expenditures during the agreement period because there would be less risk of those reductions negatively impacting their benchmark updates. This, in turn, could lead to greater savings generated and increased shared savings payments to ACOs.

Under the proposed approach, a three-way blend would be calculated as the weighted average of the ACPT (one-third) and the existing national-regional blend (two-thirds) for use in updating an ACO's historical benchmark between BY3 and the performance year (PY). The ACPT component of the blend would be an external factor, meaning it would not be impacted by the individual or collective performance of ACOs. The reference to a “two-way blend” is synonymous with the existing blended national-regional growth rates under § 425.601.

The CMS Office of the Actuary (OACT) provides projections of Medicare program spending for various recurring deliverables, including the Medicare Trustees Report and the Advance Notice and Announcement of Medicare Advantage capitation rates and Part C and Part D payment policies. These publications include both historical and projected future Medicare spending amounts expressed on a per capita basis (differences in ESRD and non-ESRD calculations, are described in further detail in this section). These amounts published in the Advance Notice and the Announcement are labeled the FFS USPCCs. We proposed to calculate the ACPT component of the blended annual update using an annualized growth rate based on 5-year-projections in per capita spending as of the start of an ACO's agreement period. We explained in the proposed rule that we selected this projection horizon to align with the 5-year agreement periods used under the Shared Savings Program. The ACPT would be projected by OACT and would be a modification of the existing FFS USPCC growth trend projections used annually for establishing Medicare Advantage rates. The modifications to the FFS USPCC, aimed at making the trends more consistent with the Shared Savings Program's existing expenditure calculations, would reflect the following:

• Exclusion of payments for indirect medical education (IME), disproportionate share hospitals (DSH), including both empirically justified DSH payments and uncompensated care payments, and the new proposed supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal Hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico that was subsequently finalized in the FY 2023 IPPS/LTCH PPS final rule.

• Inclusion of payments associated with hospice claims.

OACT currently produces separate FFS USPCCs for ESRD (dialysis-only, including aged/ESRD, disabled/ESRD and ESRD-only) and non-ESRD aged/disabled populations. Likewise, OACT would also calculate the ACPT separately for these two populations. Currently, most Shared Savings Program benchmarking calculations are performed separately for four separate Medicare enrollment types: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, and aged/non-dual eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. The Shared Savings Program identifies enrollment type status on a monthly basis. A beneficiary month is classified as an ESRD month if the beneficiary was in long-term dialysis or transplant status for that month (including up to 3 months post-graft). All non-ESRD months are then classified as one of the other three categories based on age (under 65 for disabled) and dual eligibility status (for beneficiaries 65 and over only). 324 We proposed to use the ESRD ACPT in calculating update factors for the ESRD population and to use the combined Aged/Disabled ACPT in calculating update factors for the remaining three enrollment types (disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible). We explained that using ACPTs based on the existing populations for which FFS USPCCs are calculated would allow us to leverage existing OACT models which do not currently differentiate among categories within the aged/disabled population. We noted that we did not believe that there would be significant precision gained from revising these existing models to incorporate assumptions regarding these distinctions. Furthermore, we noted that outside of the unforeseen impact of the PHE for COVID-19, national assignable per capita spending growth rates were reasonably consistent across the three non-ESRD enrollment types from 2013-2019 and noted that we anticipated that pattern continuing during the period in which the ACPT would be incorporated into ACO calculations.

324 Refer to Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses and Assignment Methodology Specifications (January 2022, Version #10), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-1 (Appendix E).

We proposed to set the ACPT growth factors for an ACO's entire 5-year agreement period near the start of the agreement period. The ACPT factors would remain unchanged throughout the ACO's agreement period, providing a degree of certainty to ACOs. We noted that we anticipated that we would publish finalized ACPT values in the Spring of the first performance year of an ACO's agreement period, and that earlier years' trends would be available for reference prior to the start of an ACO's agreement period. We acknowledged that, under an approach that sets the value of the ACPT at the start of an ACO's agreement period, ACOs entering agreement periods in different years could be subject to higher or lower updates depending on how projections change from year to year. This could lead ACOs to try to time their entry (or renewal) in the program to try to maximize the fixed portion of their update. However, we noted that this concern would be mitigated because the ACPT would represent only one-third of the three-way blend used to update an ACO's benchmark.

We further proposed that the annualized growth rate(s) would be calculated as either a uniform annualized projected growth rate over each of the 5 performance years of the 5-year agreement period, or as two or more annualized growth rates during the 5 performance years comprising the 5-year agreement period. Two or more annualized growth rates would be used if OACT determines that a uniform annualized projected rate of growth does not reasonably fit the anticipated growth curve—for example, if growth is expected to be above- or below-average in the short-run and return to more typical levels later in the agreement period.

We noted that we considered whether the ACPT component of the blend should express projected growth on a relative basis (as the current two-way national-regional blend operates) or on an absolute (flat) dollar basis. Applying the new portion of the update as an absolute dollar growth amount would more closely adhere to the approach stipulated in section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act for the benchmark to be updated by the projected absolute amount of growth in national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program. However, under the proposed approach, the ACPT would be weighted together with the two-way national-regional blend.

We explained that based on retrospective modeling (described elsewhere in this section), both the relative basis and flat dollar approaches to calculating the ACPT are anticipated to improve the incentive to participate compared with the current two-way blend for both ACOs with higher market penetration within their regional service area (the ACO's assigned beneficiaries constitute at least 30 percent of the assignable beneficiary population within the ACO's regional service area) and ACOs operating in a regional service area with higher ACO market penetration (at least 50 percent of the assignable beneficiaries within an ACO's regional service area are assigned to any Shared Savings Program ACO). During the period examined, ACO benchmarks increased an average of $19 per capita, with an average of 62 percent of all ACOs across all years modeled receiving a larger benchmark increase compared with the current two-way blend. An average of 65 percent of ACOs operating in a regional service area with higher Shared Savings Program market penetration were better off under the three-way blended update factor compared with the current two-way blend. Additional results comparing the benefits of the three-way blend to the current two-way blend are described elsewhere in this section. We also anticipated that introducing the ACPT as part of a three-way blend may incentivize ACOs to achieve additional savings by providing a known prospective trend that allows for improved planning and provides a target for ACOs to compare their performance against. Because the prospective trend would allow ACOs to improve planning, we also noted that a higher percentage of ACOs may benefit from the three-way blend than was reflected in the simulations. In addition, we noted that we expected the three-way blend would further insulate a portion of the benchmark update from the impact of an ACO's own savings, as actual spending trends downward from initial projections.

We explained that while both approaches are, on average, favorable for ACOs, the risk-adjusted flat dollar approach is anticipated to be more beneficial to ACOs because the flat dollar amount would be based on per capita expenditures among the national assignable population, which tend to be higher than per capita expenditures among ACO-assigned beneficiaries. That is, if national per capita expenditures are projected to increase by 3 percent per year, a flat dollar amount representing 3 percent of per capita expenditures from the national assignable population would be greater than 3 percent of a typical ACO's own benchmark amount; thus, the flat dollar ACPT would result in a larger overall increase to the ACO's benchmark amount each year. Another potential advantage of calculating flat dollar amounts based on the national per capita FFS expenditures for the assignable population (rather than simply calculating flat dollar amounts from OACT's original projected dollar values for the ACPT), is that it would allow us to generate separate values for each of the four Medicare enrollment types. This approach would also align projections with actual per capita expenditures of the assignable population, minimizing the degree to which the projections may systematically differ in how they are calculated.

Therefore, we proposed to calculate flat dollar amounts (separately for each Medicare enrollment type) by applying the relevant projected growth rate to truncated national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for BY3 for the given Medicare enrollment type. The assignable population for this calculation would be identified using the assignment window for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3. Truncation would be done in the same manner as is done when calculating the ACO's own per capita expenditures to draw an equivalent comparison. That is, we would truncate national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for BY3 for a given Medicare enrollment type, for purposes of calculating the ACPT flat dollar amounts, at the 99th percentile of national Medicare FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3. This approach would be consistent with the approach to truncating an assigned beneficiary's expenditures in calculating the ACO's benchmark year expenditures as currently specified in § 425.601(a)(4), and in the proposed new provision at § 425.652(a)(4), and performance year expenditures as specified under § 425.605(a)(3) (BASIC track) and § 425.610(a)(4)(ii) (ENHANCED track). This approach to truncation to establish the ACPT flat dollar amounts would also align with the approach to truncating assignable beneficiary expenditures in calculating county expenditures (refer to § 425.601(c)(3), and proposed § 425.654(a)(3)) used in determining factors based on regional FFS expenditures, including the regional component of the two-way blend.

We also proposed to risk adjust these flat dollar amounts to account for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's assigned beneficiaries and the national assignable FFS population for each Medicare enrollment type. We noted that we had concerns that flat dollar amounts that are not risk adjusted could generate a relatively lower update for higher spending ACOs caring for medically complex populations because the amount of the update would be set based on per capita expenditures for the national assignable population (which are likely to be lower) instead of the ACO's own assigned beneficiary population. Risk adjusting the flat dollar amounts would provide a higher flat dollar amounts for ACOs serving medically complex populations. We did not propose to adjust the ACPT flat dollar amounts for geographic differences in costs or prices, as we believed that such an adjustment may inadvertently reward higher spending, less efficient ACOs with a high market share in their regional service area.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we explained that in order to blend the risk-adjusted flat dollar amounts with the corresponding two-way blend for each enrollment type, which would continue to operate on a relative basis, we would first need to re-express the risk-adjusted flat dollar amounts on a relative basis by dividing by the ACO's historical benchmark expenditure amount. This would be done separately for each Medicare enrollment type.

Using hypothetical values, the steps below illustrate how we would set the annualized growth rate(s) and calculate the ACPT flat dollar amount(s) (re-expressed as a relative value) that would be included in the three-way blend.

Step 1: Calculate annualized growth rate(s) for agreement period.

For step 1, OACT would calculate one or more annualized growth rates for the ESRD population (the ESRD ACPT) and one or more annualized growth rates for the aged/disabled population (the Aged/Disabled ACPT). Specifically, for each population OACT would project per capita spending growth for Parts A and B Medicare FFS spending as described earlier in this section between BY3 and each performance year of the agreement period. These annualized growth rates may either be calculated as a uniform annualized projected rate of growth over each of the 5 performance years of the 5-year agreement period, or as two or more annualized growth rates reflecting the projected rates of growth during the 5 performance years comprising the 5-year agreement period if CMS determines that a uniform annualized projected rate of growth does not reasonably fit the anticipated growth curve.

Step 2: Express the growth rate(s) for each performance year as flat dollar amounts (the ACPT).

For step 2, we would multiply BY3 truncated national per capita FFS expenditures calculated by OACT for the assignable FFS population for a given enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries), by the applicable growth rate to calculate the flat dollar amount of growth for each performance year. As previously described in this section, we would use ESRD growth rate(s) for the ESRD population and non-ESRD aged/disabled growth rate(s) for the disabled, aged/dual eligible, and aged/non-dual eligible populations. Thus, for example, if the truncated national assignable per capita expenditures for a given enrollment type were $13,000, and the projected growth rate for that enrollment type in that year was 5 percent per year, 325 the flat dollar amounts would be:

325 Although not specified in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we wish to clarify that for this illustration the ACPT was assumed to roughly match the annual growth rate projected for FFS USPCC Non-ESRD Part A + Part B spending from 2024 to 2025 in table II-2 of the CY 2023 Medicare Advantage (MA) Rate Announcement. The ratio of $1,186.14 divided by $1,132.07 rounds to five percent growth in spending currently expected for the first year that the ACPT would be incorporated into ACO benchmarks under our proposal. In practice, the ACPT may differ from the USPCC because of adjustments to exclude IME and DSH payments, and the supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and Puerto Rico hospitals, and include payments associated with hospice claims, and because it accounts for an extended 5-year performance period. Refer to Announcement of CY 2023 MA Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment policies, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2023-announcement.pdf .

PY1 flat dollar amount = $13,000 × (1.050−1) = $650, and

PY5 flat dollar amount = $13,000 × (1.276−1) = $3,588 326

326 For a given performance year “X” in an agreement period, the growth rate is calculated by raising the annual growth rate to the power of X (that is, multiplying the annual growth rate by itself X times). Thus, for PY5 in this example, the annual growth rate of 1.276 is computed by raising 1.05 to the power of 5 (that is, multiplying the single year growth rate of 1.05 by itself 5 times).

Step 3: Risk adjust the flat dollar amounts.

In step 3, we would multiply the flat dollar amounts for each performance year, for each enrollment type, by the ACO's mean BY3 prospective HCC risk score 327 for that enrollment type. For consistency with other Shared Savings Program risk adjustment calculations, the risk score used would first be renormalized by dividing by the national mean risk score for the assignable FFS population for that enrollment type identified for the calendar year corresponding to BY3. Risk adjusting the flat dollar amounts would allow for a higher update for ACOs serving a population that is more medically complex than the national average. If the ACO's BY3 risk score was 1.025, the risk-adjusted flat dollar amounts would be:

327 We have also used the terms “CMS-HCC prospective risk scores” and “CMS-HCC risk scores” (see, for example, the December 2018 final rule, 83 FR 68007 through 68013) to refer to such risk scores. While we choose to use the term “prospective HCC risk scores” within this section of this final rule for consistency with the terminology used in the regulations (see, for example, §§ 425.601, 425.605, and 425.610), we consider these terms to be interchangeable.

PY1 flat dollar amount = $650 × 1.025 = $666, and

PY5 flat dollar amount = $3,588 × 1.025 =$3,678

Step 4: Re-express risk-adjusted flat dollar amounts as relative factors.

The fourth and final step before calculating the three-way blended update factor would be to re-express the risk-adjusted flat dollar amount for each enrollment type on a relative basis such that it can be combined in a weighted average with the current two-way blend. We would do this by dividing the risk-adjusted flat dollar amounts computed in Step 3 for a given enrollment type by the ACO's historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type. The resulting amount would represent the final ACPT portion of the blended update factor for that enrollment type. If the historical benchmark expenditures for the enrollment type were $12,000, the final ACPT portion of the blended update factors for this enrollment type would be:

PY1 final ACPT portion of the blended update factor = ($666/$12,000) + 1 = 1.056, and

PY5 final ACPT portion of the blended update factor = ($3,678/$12,000) + 1 = 1.306

The values in this step would then be combined with the two-way blend to compute the three-way blended update factor. The ACPT would constitute one-third of the total blend, while the remaining two-thirds would consist of the existing two-way blend.

To illustrate how we would compute the three-way blend, and how it would compare with the two-way blend, we assumed for the same hypothetical ACO for a given enrollment type that the regional expenditure growth between BY3 and PY1 is 2.5 percent, that national assignable FFS expenditure growth is 3 percent and that the ACO's assigned beneficiaries represent 20 percent of the assignable population in the ACO's regional service area. For simplicity, we assumed the ACO faces a risk ratio of 1.0. The current two-way blended update factor would be calculated as:

Two-way blend = (National Update Factor × National Weight) 328 + (Regional Update Factor × (1−National Weight)); or

328 Weight for the national growth rate is calculated as the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area for BY3 that are assigned to the ACO in BY3 (refer to § 425.601(a)(5)(iv)(A)).

Two-way blend = (1.030 × 20 percent) + (1.025 × 80 percent) = 1.026.

Updating the ACO's benchmark with the two-way blended update factor alone would yield a value of $12,312 (that is, $12,000 × 1.026 = $12,312).

To calculate the three-way blend by incorporating the PY1 ACPT factor of 1.056 (from earlier in the example) we would use the following weighted average:

Three-way blend = [PY1 ACPT × ( 1/3 )] + [PY1 Two-Way Blend × ( 2/3 )]; or

Three-way blend = [1.056 × ( 1/3 )] + [1.026 × ( 2/3 )] = 1.036.

Applying the three-way blended update factor to the historical benchmark would yield an updated benchmark of $12,432 for the enrollment type (that is, $12,000 × 1.036 = $12,432). In this example, the ACO's benchmark update factor increases by 1.0 percentage point, corresponding to an increase of $120 per capita, which increases the ACO's potential for shared savings and reduces the potential for shared losses, if applicable.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we stated that including the ACPT as a component of a three-way blend could provide a degree of certainty that benchmarks would not be lowered as a result of ACOs reducing FFS spending growth, and thereby increase the incentive for such savings and strengthen incentives for ACOs to enter and remain in the Shared Savings Program. However, we also acknowledged that incorporating the ACPT into a three-way blended update factor would have the potential for mixed effects. For example, it may also lower an ACO's benchmark relative to the current approach if external factors lead to higher program spending growth than originally projected at the start of an ACO's agreement period. This could, for example, cause an ACO in a two-sided model that would not have been responsible for shared losses under the two-way blend to owe shared losses under the three-way blend or cause an ACO that would have owed shared losses under the two-way blend to owe a larger amount of shared losses under the three-way blend.

Additionally, we noted that the three-way blend could potentially have negative implications for an ACO based on the Shared Savings Program's policy regarding monitoring of ACO financial performance described in § 425.316(d). Under this policy, if an ACO's performance year expenditures exceed its updated benchmark by an amount equal to or exceeding either the ACO's negative MSR under a one-sided model or the minimum loss rate (MLR) under a two-sided model, CMS may take pre-termination actions against the ACO. For a subsequent occurrence for another performance year in the same agreement period, CMS may immediately or with advance notice terminate the ACO's participation agreement.

Consequently, we explained our belief that a guardrail would be needed to ensure the use of the three-way blend would not result in lower benchmarks than the current national-regional blend in a way that poses higher financial risk for ACOs under two-sided models, or that could jeopardize an ACO's continued participation in the Shared Savings Program under the financial performance monitoring policy described in § 425.316(d), or both.

We proposed to institute this guardrail as follows: if an ACO generates losses for a performance year that meet or exceed its minimum loss rate (MLR) (for two-sided model ACOs) or negative MSR (for one-sided model ACOs) under the three-way blend, we would recalculate the ACO's updated benchmark using the national-regional blended update factor (two-way blend). If the ACO generates a smaller amount of losses using the two-way blend, we would use this smaller amount to determine the ACO's responsibility for shared losses, if applicable, and in determining the ACO's financial performance for monitoring purposes under § 425.316(d). If the ACO generates saving using the two-way blend to update its benchmark but does not generate savings under the three-way blend, the ACO would neither be responsible for shared losses (if in a two-sided model) nor eligible for shared savings for the applicable performance year, even if the savings generated exceed the ACO's MSR. ACOs in these scenarios would publicly report their performance in accordance with § 425.308(b)(4) based on the recalculated amounts determined using the two-way blend. However, an ACO that generated savings under the two-way blend, but was not eligible to earn a shared savings payment, would be required to report zero shared savings for the performance year. We noted that we believed this guardrail would protect ACOs from the most negative potential outcomes of the proposed three-way blend, while still insulating the Trust Funds.

To illustrate how the guardrail would be applied, we considered a second hypothetical ACO participating at Level E of the BASIC track for which the updated benchmark calculated using the three-way blend was $12,760. We assumed that the ACO's per capita performance year expenditures were $12,980 and that the ACO had selected a symmetrical MSR/MLR of 1.5 percent. Using the three-way blend, the ACO would have per capita losses of −$220, or −1.7 percent of its updated benchmark which would be above ACO's selected MLR of −1.5 percent. Applying the fixed shared loss rate of 30 percent under Level E, the ACO would, in absence of the guardrail, be liable for shared losses (on a per capita basis) of −$66 and would face potential pre-termination actions or involuntary termination (depending on the ACO's financial performance in prior years of its agreement period). However, with the guardrail in place, we would re-assess the ACO's performance using the two-way blend. If the two-way blend produced an updated benchmark of $12,804, the ACO's new per capita losses amount would be −$176, or −1.4 percent of its updated benchmark which would be within the ACO's selected MLR of −1.5 percent. This ACO would therefore not be responsible for shared losses for the performance year and would not face any negative consequences under the financial performance monitoring policy. If the two-way blend instead produced an updated benchmark of $13,183, the ACO would have measured per capita savings of $203, or 1.54 percent of its updated benchmark. As previously explained, under the proposed approach, the ACO would no longer be responsible for shared losses nor face pre-termination action or termination based on its financial performance. However, although the savings amount would exceed the ACO's MSR of 1.5 percent, the ACO would not be eligible for shared savings under the proposed policy.

Under the proposal to set the ACPT for the duration of the ACO's agreement period, we explained that we would not adjust the ACPT due to external factors such as geographic price changes, efficiency discounts, or other retrospective updates occurring during the performance years throughout the agreement period. However, we acknowledged that a variety of circumstances could cause actual expenditure trends to significantly deviate from projections. Thus, we noted that we believed there would be circumstances that may warrant reducing the weight placed on the ACPT on an ad hoc basis. In particular, we noted that if we determine that expenditure growth has differed significantly from projections made at the start of the agreement period due to unforeseen circumstances, such as an economic recession, pandemic, or other factors, a reduction in the weight placed on the ACPT may be considered. For example, based on a review of projections detailed in the 2009 Medicare Trustees Report, an ACPT projected in 2009 (amidst the great recession and before passage of the ACA) would have ultimately overstated per capita spending growth from 2008 to 2013 by roughly 9 percentage points (which would have corresponded to a 3 percent upward bias to benchmarks when weighted as one-third of the blended update). We also noted that we were especially concerned that such unforeseen circumstances could result in an update factor that significantly differs from actual expenditure trends, and in turn could result in ACOs owing excessive shared losses or the Medicare Trust Funds paying out windfall shared savings. While we noted that the guardrail discussed previously would offer protection against some unexpected variances between the projected amount and actual expenditures to protect against shared losses, we also noted that we believed it would also be important for CMS to retain flexibility to reduce the impact of the prospectively determined ACPT portion of the three-way blend if unforeseen circumstances occur during an ACO's agreement period.

When determining an approach for adjusting the three-way blend if unforeseen circumstances occur, we considered CMS' experience with use of a prospective trend, calculated by OACT based on an adjusted USPCC amount, in the Next Generation ACO (NGACO) Model. 329 In the NGACO Model, CMS maintained the sole discretion to retrospectively modify the projected trend used in calculating the performance year benchmark (aggregate expenditure target) if CMS determined that exogenous factors, such as a natural disaster, epidemiological event, legislative change and/or other similarly unforeseen circumstance during the performance year, rendered the projected trend invalid. CMS used this discretion for the NGACO Model in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in PYs 2020 and 2021. For PY 2020, instead of applying the prospective trend, CMS offered NGACOs the choice between use of a retrospective national trend or a retrospective regional trend. For PY 2021, CMS applied a retrospective national trend to all NGACOs instead of a prospective trend. 330

329 CMS, “Next Generation ACO Model, Calculation of the Performance Year Benchmark: Performance Year 2021” (Section 2.1.7, “Prospective Base Year Trend”), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/media/document/ngaco-py6-bnechmark-meth .

330 CMS, “Next Generation ACO Model: Frequently Asked Questions” (May 2021), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/media/document/ngaco-2021-faqs . Refer to question 18.

Based on the experience in the NGACO Model, we explained that we believed it would be appropriate, when unforeseen circumstances occur, to adjust the three-way blend to prevent drastic differences between actual and projected expenditure trends. Accordingly, we proposed that if unforeseen circumstances occur, we would retain discretion to decrease the weight applied to the ACPT in the three-way blend. Absent unforeseen circumstances, we would weight the two-way blend as two-thirds and the ACPT as one-third in calculating the three-way blend. However, if CMS determines an unforeseen circumstance has occurred that would warrant adjustments to these weights, then CMS would modify the three-way blend to reduce the weight that will apply to the ACPT and increase the weight of the two-way blend. We further proposed that CMS would have sole discretion to determine whether unforeseen circumstances exist that would warrant adjustments to these weights, as well as the extent to which the components of the three-way blend would be re-weighted. However, given that external factors that cause deviations from projected trends would continue to be reflected in the two-way blend component of the update factor, the impacts from unforeseen circumstances that either increase or decrease the two-way blend component would also then increase or decrease the three-way blend. We noted that this would likely mitigate the need to adjust the weight of the ACPT used in the three-way blend.

Based on initial modeling, we explained our belief that the proposed three-way blended update factor with the associated guardrail, in combination with the other benchmarking changes discussed in the proposed rule, including to apply a prior savings adjustment and mitigate the impact of negative regional adjustments on ACOs, would serve as a mid-term solution to ensuring the sustainability of ACOs' historical benchmarks as we consider moving toward an administrative benchmarking methodology, as discussed in section III.G.7. of the proposed rule.

To simulate the potential impact of the three-way blend, we examined ACO spending over a 5-year period (2014 to 2019) using ACO participant lists in effect for all 12- or 6-month performance years or performance periods beginning on January 1, 2019, and existing Medicare Part A and Part B USPCC projections published in the 2014 Medicare Trustees report. 331 We also adjusted the Part A projections to remove IME, DSH, and uncompensated care payments, to better reflect how the proposed ACPT would be calculated in practice. For the purposes of this simulation, we used 2014 per capita spending as the historical benchmark for each ACO in lieu of a 3-year base period. We then simulated updating each ACO's historical benchmark for each of the 5 subsequent years using the existing two-way blended update factor methodology (in accordance with § 425.601(b)) and incorporating the simulated flat dollar ACPT amounts into a three-way blended updated factor. We compared the simulated benchmark updates determined using this three- way blend to updates simulated using the existing two-way blend. These simulations showed that, on average, ACOs were better off over the course of the 5-year agreement period using the three-way blend than using the current two-way blend. That is, in a given year, an ACO's benchmark on average increased more when the annual update was calculated using the proposed three-way blend. Incorporating the ACPT into a three-way blended update factor during the model period resulted in an average benchmark increase of $19 per capita, with an average of 62 percent of all ACOs across all years modeled receiving a larger benchmark increase compared with the current two-way blend. ACOs with high market penetration within their regional service area (ACOs whose assigned beneficiaries constitute at least 30 percent of the assignable beneficiary population within the ACO's regional service area) had similar results to those with lower market penetration (61 percent vs 63 percent, respectively), with both groups receiving larger benchmark increases from the three-way blend. ACOs operating in markets where the Shared Savings Program as a whole has higher penetration (at least 50 percent of the assignable beneficiaries in an ACO's regional service area are assigned to any Shared Savings Program ACO) were, on average, better off under the three-way blend. We observed that, on average over the 5-year period used in our modeling, approximately 65 percent of ACOs operating in markets with high Shared Savings Program penetration had a larger benchmark increase under the three-way blend compared with the two-way blend. Additionally, an average of 50 percent of ACOs with at least 25 percent of assigned beneficiaries being dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid received a higher benchmark update under the three-way blend, as well as 65 percent of ACOs with at least 20 percent of assigned beneficiaries being disabled and 55 percent of ACOs operating in rural areas. As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, these results simulate a change in how the benchmark update is calculated holding everything else constant. That is, these results do not reflect any additional savings that may have materialized had a three-way blend that includes the ACPT been in place during the 5-year period included in our modeling. However, we also explained that introducing the ACPT into a three-way blend may incentivize ACOs to achieve additional savings, and that the three-way blend would then insulate a portion of the benchmark update from the impact of those savings as actual spending trends downward from initial projections. As a result, a higher percentage of ACOs may benefit from the three-way blend than is reflected in these simulations.

331 The Boards of Trustees, Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds, “2014 Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds”, available at https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/ReportsTrustFunds/downloads/tr2014.pdf .

In the proposed rule, we noted our belief that incorporating the prospective trend into the benchmarking methodology by including the ACPT in a three-way blended update factor would be an important step towards an administrative benchmarking approach. ACOs may have a greater incentive to enter and continue participation in the Shared Savings Program when their benchmarks are further decoupled from their ongoing observed FFS spending while continuing to reflect a measure of the ACO's efficiency relative to its region. This approach may also serve to anchor and stabilize benchmarks to the extent that the ACPT projected growth component is an effective counterbalance when there are changes in an ACO's penetration in its regional service area that affect the weights given to the national and regional expenditure components of the current two-way blended update factor. However, we recognized that some interested parties may still have concerns and prefer a different approach to address impacts that may result from ACO market penetration. In section III.G.5.c.(6) of the proposed rule (87 FR 46183 through 46186), we sought comment on two potential alternatives to the package of benchmarking policies we were proposing to adopt. We explained that both of the alternatives presented in section III.G.5.c.(6) would attempt to limit the impact of an ACO's own assigned beneficiaries on regional factors used in the benchmarking methodology.

Because the proposed three-way blended update factor would be used in place of an update factor based on the projected absolute amount of growth in national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original FFS program as called for in section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act, we explained that this proposal would require us to continue to use our authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act. That provision grants the Secretary the authority to use other payment models, including payment models that use alternative benchmarking methodologies, if the Secretary determines that doing so would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare program and program expenditures under the alternative methodology would be equal to or lower than those that would result under the statutory payment model.

In the proposed rule, we explained our belief that by combining an external, prospective factor calculated based on the USPCC, as a component in the benchmark update, the proposed ACPT/national-regional three-way blended update factor would decouple an ACO's benchmark to a certain degree from ongoing observed FFS spending which is currently reflected in ACO benchmarks under the methodology specified under § 425.601. We noted that this approach may serve to anchor and stabilize benchmarks to the extent that the ACPT projected growth component is an effective counterbalance to the savings achieved by ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program, which reduce the update factor under the current two-way national-regional blended update, including as a result of increasing market penetration by efficient ACOs in their regional service area. The proposed guardrail would protect ACOs from larger shared losses (or potentially from the negative implications of financial monitoring) but would not allow ACOs to move to a position of sharing in savings. Additionally, the proposal that CMS would retain discretion to reweight the components of the three-way blend to adjust the weight applied to the ACPT and the two-way blend in the event of unforeseen circumstances that result in drastic differences between the ACPT and actual national per capita FFS expenditure growth for assignable beneficiaries for a given performance year, would protect against ACOs owing excessive shared losses or the Medicare Trust Funds paying out windfall shared savings. We explained our belief that this combination of additional incentives and safeguards may encourage ACOs to enter and continue participation in the Shared Savings Program.

As discussed in section III.G.5.d. of the proposed rule (87 FR 46186 through 46188), we also proposed to determine the assignable population of beneficiaries used in calculating county-level FFS expenditures, and in other factors based on the assignable population in the ACO's regional service area, using the assignment window that corresponds to the ACO's selected assignment methodology to improve the precision of the calculations. As we explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, this modification would address a favorable bias in calculations for ACOs under prospective assignment, resulting in an estimated decrease in regionally adjusted historical benchmarks for these ACOs estimated to range from 0.2 percent-1.9 percent based on modeling using historical benchmarks for ACOs participating in the 6-month performance year from July 1, 2019, through December 31, 2019 (compared to leaving the bias uncorrected). If left uncorrected, the bias could potentially grow over time as more ACOs are subject to higher weights in the calculation of the regional adjustment. The proposed change in methodology for identifying the assignable beneficiaries used in calculating factors based on regional FFS expenditures would also improve the precision of the calculation of the blended national-regional growth rates within the benchmark update.

Considering the combination of these factors, in the proposed rule we explained our belief that the changes to the methodology for updating the benchmark that we proposed pursuant to section 1899(i)(3) of the Act would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare Program. More specifically, we noted that we believed the introduction of the prospectively set ACPT into the blended benchmark update factor would increase the incentive for ACOs to achieve savings by partially insulating ACOs from the impact of those savings on future benchmark updates. We also noted that our belief that this change would encourage ACOs to enter and remain in the Shared Savings Program, which would lead to improvement in the quality of care furnished to Medicare FFS beneficiaries because participating ACOs have an incentive to perform well on quality measures in order to maximize the shared savings they may receive, and in the case of ACOs participating under the ENHANCED track to minimize any shared losses owed (as described in section III.G.4. of the proposed rule). In addition, as discussed in the Regulatory Impact Analysis for the proposed rule (87 FR 46427), we projected that this proposed approach for use of an ACPT/national-regional three-way blended update factor, in combination with other proposed changes to the statutory payment model in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, as well as current policies established using the authority of section 1899(i)(3) of the Act, would not increase program expenditures relative to those under the statutory payment model. We explained that we would continue to reexamine this projection in the future to ensure that the requirement under section 1899(i)(3)(B) of the Act that an alternative payment model not result in additional program expenditures continues to be satisfied. In the event that we later determine that the payment model established under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act no longer meets this requirement, we would undertake additional notice and comment rulemaking to make adjustments to the payment model to assure continued compliance with the statutory requirements.

We proposed that the update factor based on a three-way blend of the ACPT and blended national-regional growth rates and the associated guardrail would be applicable to agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. We proposed to specify the use of the three-way blend, the associated guardrail, and the discretion for CMS to adjust the weight of the ACPT in the three-way blend in the event of unforeseen circumstances in paragraph (b) of a proposed new provision at § 425.652, which would govern the process for establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. We also proposed to specify within § 425.652(b) the other components of the update factor, namely the calculation of the national and regional components of the blend which would follow the same approach currently specified under § 425.601(b), although with conforming changes to reflect the use of a three-way blend. Further, we proposed to specify the calculation of the ACPT in a new provision at § 425.660.

We sought comment on the proposal to use a three-way blend that incorporates the ACPT to update an ACO's historical benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. We also sought comment on the specific elements of the approach, including our proposal to calculate the ACPT on a risk-adjusted flat dollar basis, to institute a guardrail to protect ACOs, and to retain discretion to adjust the weight applied to the ACPT and the two-way blend in the event of unforeseen circumstances.

The following is a summary of the public comments received in response to our proposal to incorporate a prospective, external factor in the growth rates used to update the historical benchmark and our responses:

Comment: Commenters addressing our proposal to use a three-way blend that incorporates the ACPT to update an ACO's historical benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, generally favored an approach that would attempt to insulate a portion of the annual update from the cost efficiencies resulting from the ACO's historical performance and thereby mitigate the ratchet effect. However, commenters offered varying perspectives on whether the proposed approach or an alternative approach would best achieve these objectives.

Many commenters generally supported an approach under which CMS would prospectively set a component of the ACO's updated historical benchmarks. Some commenters expressed support for the proposed approach to use a three-way blended update factor. One commenter explained that the proposed ACPT would positively impact the patient mix ACOs serve by offsetting regional factors that make it difficult for ACOs to achieve shared savings and serve to disincentivize ACOs from providing care to certain beneficiary populations. Commenters also explained that the approach would provide greater stability to the benchmark value and allow ACOs to better predict their benchmarks and have greater visibility into the benchmark calculation (although as discussed elsewhere within this section of this final rule, some commenters urged for increased transparency on the calculation of the ACPT). Another commenter explained that the proposed ACPT would enable ACOs to effectively operate in under-resourced communities, close gaps in health equity and address social determinants of health. Yet another commenter explained that an ACPT would help maintain fairness within the Shared Savings Program, from which both ACOs and the government benefit.

More generally, some commenters believed that use of a prospective, external factor in the benchmarking methodology would be a step toward a longer-term administrative benchmarking approach, as discussed further in section III.G.7 of this final rule. Several commenters explained that the ratchet effect, and CMS' goal of having all Medicare FFS beneficiaries in an accountable care arrangement by 2030 make the current benchmarking strategies untenable. These commenters explained that the ACPT would serve as a positive short-term step to ameliorating these issues while CMS works to refine its administrative benchmarking strategy.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' support for the proposal under which we would place one-third weight on the ACPT and two-thirds weight on the existing two-way national-regional blend used to update the ACO's historical benchmark. We are finalizing this proposal, which we believe will address dynamics under which savings achieved by ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program reduce the two-way national-regional blended update, including as a result of increasing market penetration by efficient ACOs in their regional service area. We believe use of the ACPT, calculated as a risk-adjusted flat dollar amount set near the start of the ACO's 5-year agreement period, will decouple an ACO's benchmark to a certain degree from ongoing observed FFS spending currently reflected in ACO benchmarks and will thereby serve to anchor and stabilize benchmarks. We continue to believe the national-regional blend, comprising two-thirds of the update factor (with the majority of the two-way blend consisting of the regional trend for most ACOs, since most ACOs have relatively low market penetration), plays an important role in the update factor by ensuring benchmarks account for expenditure growth in the ACO's regional service area.

Further, we believe that finalizing the proposed three-way blended update factor, and other changes to the Shared Savings Program benchmarking methodology and participation options (including to make AIPs available to eligible ACOs, and to smooth the transition to performance-based risk) that we are finalizing as described in sections III.G.5 and III.G.2 of this final rule (respectively), are important steps forward in advancing Medicare's value-based care strategy of growth, alignment, and equity. A key component of this strategy is to address the underlying dynamics of the current benchmarking methodology, including the existing two-way national-regional blend, and ensure there is sufficient incentive for participation among ACOs serving underserved communities, or high-cost, medically complex populations.

Comment: A few commenters urged CMS not to finalize use of a prospective, external factor in updating ACO historical benchmarks. Several commenters urged CMS to take additional time to evaluate or pilot test the potential impact of the proposed approach before fully implementing it within the Shared Savings Program.

Many commenters expressed concerns about the proposed approach and recommended modifications to the approach if CMS were to move forward with incorporating a prospective, external factor in updating historical benchmarks, or provided alternative suggestions for modifying the benchmarking methodology. Commenters' concerns tended to center on the unknown accuracy of the projected amount, the potential for mixed effects of the approach under which ACOs may receive lower benchmarks under the three-way blend compared to the existing two-way blend, and a preference among some commenters for use of regional FFS trends in benchmark calculations. Some commenters urged CMS to adopt an alternative approach to calculating regional FFS expenditures, in addition to or instead of use of a prospective, external factor in updating the ACO's historical benchmark. We summarize and respond to these commenters' concerns and suggestions elsewhere within this section of this final rule.

Response: We decline commenters' suggestions to forgo finalization of the proposed approach to incorporate a prospective, external factor in the growth rates used in updating the benchmark, and we are finalizing the proposal to apply this approach to update ACO benchmarks for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. We believe the three-way blended update factor is one of several timely and appropriate changes to the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology designed to ensure the availability of robust benchmarks that create sufficient incentives to encourage ACOs to enter and remain in the Shared Savings Program. We believe that finalizing the three-way blended update factor in this final rule, as part of a package of benchmark changes, is crucial to supporting the agency's goal of having all Medicare FFS beneficiaries in an accountable care arrangement by 2030. These important changes will help ensure that ACOs' past success does not limit opportunities to achieve and sustain success over time, thus strengthening participation incentives and ultimately expanding the Shared Savings Program's reach. We further believe that incorporating the ACPT into the update factor could maintain accurate benchmarks in light of rapid growth in the number of Shared Savings Program ACOs and the percentage of Medicare FFS beneficiaries assigned to ACOs. Based on modeling in the Regulatory Impact Analysis (section VII of this final rule) that showed significant expected growth in benchmark spending under the program, we project, on average, up to 4 million additional beneficiaries could be assigned to Shared Savings Program ACOs in the 10 years between 2024-2034, as a result of the changes we are finalizing to the Shared Savings Program's policies with this final rule, representing a significant increase in market penetration by ACOs. We believe the three-way blended update factor, which decouples one-third of an ACO's benchmark from ongoing observed FFS spending, will provide for a more sustainable update methodology than the two-way blend alone, particularly as market penetration by Shared Savings Program ACOs increases.

We decline to delay implementation of the ACPT as part of the three-way blended update factor, and we decline to allow for additional time to test the approach, as suggested by commenters. The timing of implementing the three-way blended update factor, among other changes to Shared Savings Program policies we are finalizing with this final rule, is consequential. ACOs entering and continuing their participation in the Shared Savings Program under 5-year agreement periods beginning in upcoming years, such as for the agreement periods spanning 2024-2028, 2025-2029, and 2026-2030, will be pivotal to ensuring Medicare FFS beneficiaries are in a care relationship with accountability for quality and total cost of care in order to meet the agency's 2030 goal.

Moreover, as described elsewhere in this section of this final rule, our proposals were informed by consideration of suggested modifications to the benchmarking methodology from ACOs and other interested parties, and by our experience with Innovation Center ACO Models. The development of our proposal to use the ACPT as part of a three-way blended update factor was informed by consideration of commenters' suggestions from earlier rulemaking, including suggestions received in response to comment solicitations on the Shared Savings Program benchmarking methodology in the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 65295 through 65306). The development of our proposed approach was also informed by our experience with the NGACO Model and with the Global and Professional Direct Contracting Model (to be redesigned and renamed as the ACO REACH Model beginning January 1, 2023) which uses a prospective trend calculated by OACT based on an adjusted USPCC amount. However, we anticipate evaluating and monitoring the impact of the ACPT on ACO historical benchmarks, and would address any necessary refinements to the approach through future notice and comment rulemaking.

Comment: Some commenters that expressed concerns about the proposed approach encouraged CMS to engage with ACOs and other interested parties to further develop and evaluate the ACPT.

Response: We welcome and encourage an ongoing dialogue between CMS, ACOs and other interested parties about approaches to improving the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology, including the policies we are establishing in this final rule.

Comment: The progression of the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking policies was an important backdrop for commenters' consideration of the adequacy of the proposed three-way blended update factor. A few commenters recounted the initial use of factors based on national FFS expenditures to update the benchmark, followed by use of factors based on regional FFS expenditures, and most recently the use of a factor that is a blend of national expenditure and regional expenditure components, with some commenters noting that the current two-way blended update factor does not adequately account for the influence of an ACO's savings in relation to its own benchmark or the influence of other ACOs in its region on its regional expenditures.

Commenters took opposing positions on the best approach to address concerns with the current benchmarking approach, with some favoring incorporating an external factor based on projected national cost trends and others urging CMS to maintain or increase the role of a regional component in the benchmark update. Many commenters urged CMS to put in place safeguards to mitigate the potential for negative impacts of the benchmarking methodology on ACOs. Commenters' concerns centered on the potential negative impact of the proposed three-way blend on ACOs' ability to generate shared savings and the amount of savings, as compared to the existing two-way blend, as well as concerns about whether the existing two-way blend offers sufficient incentive for ACOs to participate in the program and generate savings. A few commenters urged CMS to pace the phase-in of changes to the benchmarking methodology in a way that safeguards against negative impacts on ACOs that could create disincentives for ACOs to enter or remain in the Shared Savings Program.

Commenters opposed to increasing the relative weight of national spending growth in the benchmark update, thereby reducing the relative weight on regional spending trends, cited concerns that the proposed ACPT and three-way blend would not adequately account for geographic variation in spending growth that is outside of an ACO's control. As one commenter explained, echoing concerns raised by others, the proposed three-way blend would constitute a “step backward” from accounting for regional variation in ACO benchmarks.

Some commenters explained their belief that comparing an ACO to its region is a fairer and more accurate approach to assessing performance than comparing to national growth rates. Several commenters specified that regional spending trends help account for local changes or shocks to spending growth for which ACOs should not be held accountable.

Several commenters noted that because there are persistent and significant variations in regional spending trends compared to national trends, regional trends would serve as a more accurate measure of how spending would have changed absent the ACO's response to Shared Savings Program incentives. Some commenters explained that using a national trend factor would result in higher benchmarks and thereby benefit ACOs in regions with comparatively slower spending growth, and result in lower benchmarks and thereby harm ACOs in regions with comparatively faster spending growth, leading to selective participation. For example, commenters explained that efficient, low-cost providers, including ACOs, that operate in regions where spending exceeds the ACPT would be harmed by having their already low spending targets further reduced over time. Another commenter also stated more generally that such selective participation could arise as ACOs observe projection errors that reveal the ACPT to be higher relative to actual spending trends. Although perhaps indicative of an inadvertent error, we note that several commenters also suggested (to the contrary), that if an ACO is in a region where spending growth falls below that of the USPCC, it would receive smaller update factors under CMS's proposed use of the ACPT. Some of these commenters cited their own analyses to support this notion that regional trends vary substantially and are persistent over time. One commenter expressed concern that ACOs with higher market penetration may tend to have faster regional growth rates and thus receive lower benchmarks under the three-way blend compared to the current two-way blend, and ACOs under these circumstances may be hesitant to enter the Shared Savings Program.

Given the aforementioned concerns, commenters requested various modifications to the proposed approach to incorporating an externally set prospective trend, or suggested CMS use alternative approaches to update the historical benchmark, including the following.

• Several commenters suggested keeping the current two-way blend weighting approach and substituting the historical national spending trend component with the proposed ACPT. For example, one commenter cited their belief that spending growth rates vary substantially and systematically across geographic areas and expressed concern that adding the ACPT would effectively reduce the weight given to regional spending growth in the annual benchmark updates. The commenter provided an analysis of risk-adjusted spending trend variations at the CBSA and county levels from 2015 through 2020 to support these conclusions. Their results suggested that the variation in the difference between county and national cumulative growth rates increases as the performance year grows farther from the baseline year, and they concluded from these and related findings that ACOs in some regions would experience sustained differences in annual expenditure growth from the national average growth rate. The commenter stated that basing the ACPT on the national trend and reducing the weight on the regional trend would then create winners and losers solely based on geography and create greater incentives for selective participation and provider consolidation.

• Several commenters suggested that the ACPT project regional rather than national spending growth.

• One commenter suggested CMS consider additional adjustments to mitigate the impact of regional spending variation in the three-way blend, for example by using case mix and geographic adjustments, but did not specify what these approaches could entail.

• A few commenters expressed their preference for use of only regional spending trends in benchmarking instead of either the current two-way blend or the proposed three-way blend.

Response: One common thread throughout many commenters' concerns was that observed regional spending trends are persistent over time and vary substantially across geographic regions, and so reducing the relative weight assigned to regional spending trends in the proposed three-way blend might disadvantage ACOs in areas with a faster spending growth rate compared with the current two-way blend.

To assess commenters' concerns, CMS analyzed whether ACO regional service area per capita spending growth rates were predictably above or below national spending growth over an extended historical period. The analysis used FFS per capita spending published by CMS over the 2007 to 2016 time series broken down by Hospital Referral Region (HRR) geographic level. 332 HRRs provide a reasonable approximation of how counties can be weighted together to produce various ACO service areas. Comparing individual HRR excess growth in per capita spending relative to the national average for a base period covering 2007 to 2010 compared to a quasi-performance period of 2011 to 2016 indicated that about 47 percent of HRRs flipped from positive excess growth in the first period to negative excess growth in the second period or vice-versa. Among the 53 percent of HRRs that remained above or below national average growth in both periods the cause was likely related to relative spending at baseline. For 173 HRRs with positive excess relative growth in both periods the average starting per capita spending level was on average 13 percent below the national average, whereas for the 133 HRRs with below-national average growth in both periods the average starting per capita spending level was on average 7 percent above the national average. For comparison, the average starting per capita spending level was on average only 3 percent below the national average for the 47 percent of ACOs that flipped from one side of national growth to the other across the two periods. By utilizing a risk-adjusted flat-dollar method, the ACPT contribution to the three-way update is therefore expected to be reasonably equitable by providing a higher relative update for ACOs with (or in regions with) low spending at baseline (the type of HRR that tended to show excess growth historically). Modifying the analysis above using risk-adjusted absolute growth in per capita expenditures confirmed that the average starting per capita spending levels converged to within 4 percentage points for all three categories of HRRs described above (that is, HRRs that stayed higher than average growth over both periods, HRRs that remained below-average growth over both periods, and all remaining HRRs that flipped from one side of national average growth to the other from the first period to the next). Furthermore, the correlation in HRRs' average excess growth between the 2 multi-year periods (after employing risk adjustment and using absolute growth) was 0.18 when including all HRRs and only 0.05 after excluding three outliers with very high starting spending levels (McAllen and Harlingen, both in Texas, and Miami, Florida), effectively implying no relationship between an HRR's excess trend in the first period to the second. Importantly the use of the ACPT in a three-way blended update factor will also provide an update component that will be protected from ratcheting downward as the Shared Savings Program is expected to grow and protected from ACOs' impacting spending at the regional and national levels.

332 Data, Medicare Geographic Variation—by National, State & County, downloaded from https://data.cms.gov/summary-statistics-on-use-and-payments/medicare-geographic-comparisons/medicare-geographic-variation-by-national-state-county .

Over a 5-year agreement period, we recognize some ACOs may be disadvantaged or advantaged in the short term by benchmark updates that give greater weight to a national update factor. However, we believe that the net impact of these deviations will be modest in the context of offsetting considerations, for example: the three-way blend only incorporates the ACPT at a one-third weight and maintains the current two-way blend for the majority weight of the benchmark trend calculation, allowing for a significant proportion of the benchmark update to reflect expenditure growth in an ACO's regional service area, particularly as many ACOs have a relatively small amount of penetration within their market; the ACPT itself is expected to project spending above realized spending as ACOs generate savings, thereby providing a stable, predictable component of the update factor that will be beneficial for ACOs; a guardrail will protect ACOs from experiencing additional shared losses due to the three-way blend; and positive regional adjustments will continue to provide a benchmarking advantage for more efficient ACOs. Further, in light of these offsetting factors, we also believe that overall the benefits of use of the ACPT in updating the benchmark, for attracting and retaining ACOs in the Shared Savings Program and in turn savings potential, outweigh the potential negative impact on some ACOs' update amount as a result of this approach. We appreciate commenters' concerns about potential detrimental effects of this policy and will monitor how the three-way blend affects ACOs' benchmarks as it is implemented, and would address the need for any potential modifications to the approach through future notice and comment rulemaking.

We decline to adopt commenters' suggestions to maintain the current two-way blend and replace the current national component with the proposed ACPT, or to use only regional trends to calculate ACO benchmarks. We continue to believe that the existing two-way national-regional blend serves an important role in reducing the influence of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries on the benchmark update, and serves as an alternative to removing the ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the assignable population, 333 which we believe is an untenable solution. (Refer to section III.G.5.c.(6) of this final rule for additional discussion of the alternative option under which the ACO's assigned beneficiaries would be removed from the assignable population used to calculate regional FFS expenditures.)

333 For example, in establishing this approach we explained that it could serve as an alternative option to excluding an ACO's own assigned beneficiaries from the population used to compute regional expenditures. See for example, 83 FR 68024.

Continued use of the two-way blend as a component of the three-way blended update factor maintains a degree of symmetry with the two-way blend used to trend forward expenditures for BY1 and BY2 to BY3 in establishing the ACO's historical benchmark. Furthermore, maintaining the current national-regional two-way blend remains an important safeguard during this initial introduction of the ACPT as part of the three-way blend. We will utilize the current two-way blend as the basis for the ACO's update factor as part of the guardrail to protect ACOs against higher financial risk under the three-way blend, and it is also integral to our approach to addressing unforeseen circumstances that impact the accuracy of the ACPT, by reducing the weight on the ACPT within the three-way blend and increasing the weight on the two-way blend. However, CMS will continue to monitor the application of the ACPT in benchmark updates and in the future may explore potential modifications to how the external projected growth rate is incorporated. Any such modifications would be made through notice and comment rulemaking.

We decline to adopt commenters' various suggestions to have the ACPT project regional instead of national trends. Calculating ACO region-specific ACPTs would require projecting spending growth at the county level, based on our current approach to defining an ACO's regional service area according to § 425.20, which is infeasible because assumptions for multi-year spending growth are made on a population level (that is, on a national basis, Medicare-wide) and not on a geographic basis.

We also decline at this time to adopt the commenter's suggestion that we make geographic adjustments to the ACPT because we believe the commenters' concerns are at least partly mitigated by the three-way blend maintaining the existing two-way blend, which incorporates regional trends. However, we note that in the request for information on administratively set benchmarks in section III.G.7 of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we discussed our consideration of an approach under which we would incorporate adjustments into the ACPT to account for changes in relative price levels across counties.

Regarding the commenter's suggestion that we apply case mix adjustments to the ACPT, we note that the approach we proposed, and are finalizing, to calculate the ACPT as a risk-adjusted flat dollar amount will account for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's assigned beneficiaries and the national assignable FFS population for each Medicare enrollment type. As we explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, risk adjusting the flat dollar amount will provide higher flat dollar amounts for ACOs serving medically complex populations.

Comment: Some commenters addressed more specifically the potential role of the proposed three-way blend in addressing concerns about ratchet effects on benchmark update factors resulting from high ACO market penetration.

Some commenters expressed their belief that the proposed three-way blended update factor was an incomplete solution to addressing the impact of ACO market penetration on historical benchmark expenditures, and suggested that CMS address these impacts by making additional adjustments to Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology. Some commenters, mostly commenters that also expressed a preference for use of regional spending trends in benchmarking, suggested removing ACOs' assigned beneficiaries from regional FFS expenditures used in calculating benchmarks. Commenters varied in whether they suggested these changes in addition to or instead of the proposed three-way blended update factor, or in addition to suggested alternative approaches. A few commenters also suggested that CMS use a broader geographic region to determine regional FFS expenditures as part of alternative suggestions, which included maintaining the existing national-regional blended update factor instead of implementing the proposed three-way blend. We refer readers to section III.G.5.c.(6) of this final rule, where we summarize and respond to comments on related alternatives. Further, some commenters believed the three-way blend would provide an inadequate solution when savings generated by ACOs with higher market shares subsequently ratchet down these ACOs' regional benchmarks.

Several commenters indicated there may not be an urgent need for the proposed three-way blend, for example pointing to ACO market share being at or below 40 percent of the national FFS population and that few ACOs are heavily penetrated in their regional service area. Another commenter made a more general statement that using a prospective trend factor dilutes the impact of ACO market share on the benchmark but fails to address the root cause of the ratchet effect and is therefore an inadequate solution. A few of these commenters pointed to these factors as reasons for CMS to delay implementation of the three-way blend within the Shared Savings Program, or to consider alternative approaches to address the underlying issue.

Response: While we agree with commenters that many ACOs have relatively small penetration in their regional market area, we disagree that this would be a reason to forestall addressing ratchet effects within the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology through use of the three-way blended update factor. As discussed elsewhere within section III.G.5 of this final rule, ACOs and other interested parties have continued to raise concerns about benchmarking dynamics under which ACOs compete against themselves as their spending reductions are reflected in the regional spending trends that determine a portion of their benchmarks. Additionally, even in areas where a single ACO may represent a small portion of the assignable beneficiaries in its regional service area, the collective effects of other ACOs within the regional service area may also influence regional trends. We believe the use of the three-way blended update factor is an important step towards a more sustainable benchmarking methodology that offers sufficient incentives to encourage entry into and continued participation by ACOs in the Shared Savings Program, accounting for variation in ACOs' market share and the level of penetration of the ACOs collectively within a region. Furthermore, we anticipate participation in the Shared Savings Program will grow as CMS makes strides towards its goal of having all Medicare FFS beneficiaries in an accountable care arrangement by 2030.

Comment: A few commenters addressed the potential impact of the benchmarking policies on health care market dynamics. One commenter generally suggested that regional benchmarks help drive competition within regions. Several commenters indicated that emphasizing national spending trends in a three-way blended update factor would create a stronger incentive for ACOs to consolidate within regional markets as ACOs seek greater influence on their region's spending to help them remain under the national trend. The commenters indicated that these incentives exist because ACOs that have higher market penetration would face benchmarks where national spending trends, observed and projected, account for more than a one-third weight. Another commenter explained that the proposed three-way blended update factor could create a significant financial disincentive for independent practices and physicians in certain regions to move into and stay in the Shared Savings Program. This commenter urged CMS not to finalize the proposal, but instead to work with stakeholders to assess benchmarking changes that would better achieve CMS' goals and be more equitably applied.

Response: We are not persuaded by commenters' concerns that the use of an ACPT within a three-way blended update factor could create consolidation incentives within regional markets. As we have described in earlier rulemaking (see for example, 83 FR 68049), overall payment reform has been associated with little acceleration in consolidation of health care providers that surpasses trends already underway, although there is some evidence of potential defensive consolidation in response to new payment models. 334 Anecdotally, ACOs provide physician practices with a way to stay independent and offer a viable alternative to merging with a hospital. 335 We believe the three-way blend would likely do little to substantially increase any existing incentives for provider consolidation as compared to the two-way blended update factor. To the contrary, we believe the changes to the Shared Savings Program's participation options and financial methodology we are finalizing with this final rule have the potential to attract and retain ACOs that vary in their composition of providers/suppliers, their efficiency relative to their region, their experience with accountable care initiatives, and in the needs of the populations they serve. In particular, participation by new, low revenue ACOs may be fostered by the availability of advance investment payments to eligible ACOs (discussed in section III.G.2.a of this final rule), a smoother transition to two-sided risk (discussed in section III.G.2.b of this final rule), and the increased opportunities for low revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track to earn shared savings (discussed in section III.G.5.f of this final rule). Additionally, combining with another ACO or adding new providers/suppliers to the ACO will not necessarily increase an ACO's market share in a localized geographic area, as these actions may actually grow the ACO's defined regional service area. Lastly, the one-third weighting given to the ACPT may reduce incentives for ACOs to consolidate compared to the current two-way blend because consolidation would have limited to no impacts on an external, national prospectively set update factor.

334 See, for example, Neprash HT, Chernew ME & McWilliams JM. Little Evidence Exists to Support the Expectation That Providers Will Consolidate to Enter New Payment Models. Health Affairs. 2017; 36(2): 346-354. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2016.0840. Available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.2016.0840 .

335 See for example, Mostashari, F. The Paradox of Size: How Small, Independent Practices Can Thrive in Value-Based Care. Ann Fam Med. 2016; 14(1):5-7. doi:10.1370/afm.1899. Available at https://www.annfammed.org/content/14/1/5.long .

Comment: One commenter explained its belief that the proposed fixed weight of one-third applied to the ACPT component of the three-way blended update factor is not appropriate when there are great variations in expenditures between counties that ACOs serve and in the level of an ACO's market penetration in its respective region. This commenter instead suggested that CMS consider applying a “dynamic” weight for the ACPT, such as the approach used to calculate the weights within the national-regional blended growth rate, or another, statistically sound formula.

Response: We decline at this time to adopt the commenter's suggestion to adjust the weight given to the ACPT component of the three-way blend based on each ACO's level of market penetration, as is done for the national component of the current two-way blend. As we discuss elsewhere in this section of this final rule, a key aim of incorporating a prospectively projected growth factor into the annual benchmark update is to provide ACOs with a degree of certainty regarding these updates for the duration of their agreement period, while simultaneously insulating a portion of the benchmark update from the impact of any savings achieved by ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program. The “dynamic” weight suggested by the commenter would reduce the level of certainty the ACPT would provide to ACOs because the weight applied to that portion of the three-way blend could fluctuate on an annual basis, and ACOs would not find out the final weight applied to a given performance year until several months after that performance year ended. Additionally, we continue to believe that a variable weight similar to what is applied in the current two-way blend is not necessary for the ACPT portion of the three-way blend because the growth factor used for the ACPT is projected at the beginning of the agreement period and would not be impacted by an ACO's performance, unlike impacts that could occur on the regional portion of the two-way blend for ACOs with high market penetration. CMS will continue to monitor the three-way blend and may explore potential modifications in the future to how the external projected growth rate is incorporated. Any such modifications would be made through notice and comment rulemaking.

Comment: MedPAC was generally supportive of the proposed three-way blend but had reservations about the potential for USPCC projections to overestimate growth in national per capita spending, which MedPAC explained could result in benchmarks that fail to adequately incentivize ACOs to provide care efficiently and lead to shared savings payments that are larger than warranted. MedPAC suggested that the benchmark growth rate should be lower than the USPCC. MedPAC noted another concern with basing part of the benchmark growth rate on USPCC is that the spending measure includes several types of spending that are not under the control of ACOs and should not be included in benchmark growth rates, such as IME and DSH payments. Further, MedPAC recommended excluding shared savings payments and other value-based payments made to ACOs or providers from the ACPT. MedPAC explained that including those payments in the benchmark growth rate would act to increase benchmarks by essentially “double counting” those savings, which would result in less pressure on ACOs to reduce spending growth. According to MedPAC, not only would this undermine the goals of the Shared Savings Program, but the higher spending in FFS would carry through to Medicare Advantage benchmarks, resulting in less pressure on private plans to bring down spending growth in that part of the Medicare program.

Another commenter raised concerns that the three-way blend would not allow benchmarks to increase beyond actual spending growth rates if the ACPT takes into account expected spending reductions from ACOs over the projection period. Instead of implementing the three-way blend, the commenter suggested that CMS broaden the geographic regions used to compute the regional component of the existing national-regional blend and consider increasing that growth rate by a fixed percentage-point amount (such as 0.25 percentage points).

Response: We appreciate the commenters' concerns regarding the incorporation of expected savings from ACO participation in calculating the ACPT. The FFS USPCCs, long-running annual projections, are highly analogous to the ACPT. To the extent that ACO participation in the Shared Savings Program has impacted spending in the past, these net savings are implicitly incorporated into the baseline claims data used to generate Medicare spending projections for purposes of the USPCC on a net basis (after accounting for additional outlays such as shared savings payments). This is because, unlike the current two-way blend that measures growth in claims-based spending alone, the USPCC is (and the ACPT in the future will be) sourced from Medicare spending (and expected growth in spending) encompassing total FFS Medicare outlays which include non-claims-based payments such as shared savings payments. As the MedPAC comment letter pointed out, Medicare spending projections tended to be higher than actual growth over the period since the Shared Savings Program was first implemented, a track record suggesting that future ACPT projections are unlikely to be specifically biased against ACOs if they did not show evidence of such bias during the period the program was initially ramped up. To the extent that OACT identifies a need for a direct adjustment to the USPCC for net Shared Savings Program savings, we would revisit the calculation of the ACPT and such potential adjustment in future notice and comment rulemaking.

Comment: A few commenters suggested that CMS protect ACOs from potential forecasting deviations that might arise with the ACPT due specifically to high-cost technological, therapeutic or pharmaceutical advancements over the course of an agreement period.

Response: Medicare USPCC spending projections explicitly account for known new technologies, for example when coverage determinations are announced for treatments undergoing clinical trials. In the longer run projections that are necessary for creating the ACPT (which includes five performance years) there is generally an assumption made for a component of trend related to new technologies that are not yet known. 336 This assumption may be informed by the average impact of such activity over the historical period prior to the creation of the projection. To the extent that specific high-cost therapeutics are introduced during an agreement period but after the ACPT was established, the generic assumption for growth in new technologies would in theory account for associated new spending. In addition, as described elsewhere in this section of this final rule, we believe that the proposed guardrail protecting ACOs from incurring additional shared losses under the three-way blend and the proposal to reduce the weight of the ACPT component of the three-way blend if projections diverge from actual expenditure growth due to unforeseen circumstances will effectively mitigate any remaining concerns about projection error impacting the benchmark updates, including as a result of spending for new technologies or high-cost therapeutics that go beyond the projection assumptions.

336 For example, 2022 Medicare Trustees Report describes new technology contributing to hospital case mix growth in the 10-year projections on page 122 and contributing to the volume and intensity growth assumption for the long-range projections on page 169. The Boards of Trustees, Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds, “2022 Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds”, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2022-medicare-trustees-report.pdf .

Comment: One commenter asked whether the financial impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic would be reflected in the ACPT for 2019 and beyond.

Response: The first ACPT release will be published in 2024 for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and will provide a projected annualized growth rate (or rates) relative to the 2023 benchmark year, which will be BY3 for agreement periods starting in 2024. To the extent that Medicare projections made at that time anticipate lingering effects from the COVID-19 pandemic then they would be reflected in the ACPT as well.

Comment: One commenter questioned whether the inputs into the ACPT consider the rapid increase in Medicare Advantage enrollment.

Response: The ACPT will reflect any expected changes in the average demographics of the Medicare FFS population, which would include the effect of any growth that may be expected in the overall proportion of beneficiaries electing enrollment in Medicare Advantage.

Comment: Some commenters expressed concerns about the accuracy of the ACPT, particularly over the proposed 5-year timeframe. A few commenters suggested that CMS initially use a shorter projection window to gain experience with the three-way blend, such as a 1-year, 2-year or 3-year projection. Commenters cited a number of reasons for updating the prospective calculation more frequently than every 5 years.

Some commenters referenced the significant impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on healthcare utilization and how patients interact with the healthcare system, and indicated it may be challenging to accurately project trends over the next several years. Most of these commenters encouraged CMS to evaluate the impacts of the pandemic on healthcare spending and service utilization and work with ACOs and other interested parties to develop a methodology that sufficiently addresses these concerns. These commenters tended to suggest CMS initially use a short-term trend of 1 to 2 years rather than 5 years to allow CMS time to evaluate and to refine its methodology without locking ACOs into a 5-year trend factor, which several commenters indicated may significantly under- or overpredict spending growth and changes in utilization over the agreement period. Several of these commenters suggested that CMS could consider gradually lengthening the amount of time over which the trend factor is applied as it refines its methodology.

Commenters offered a variety of other reasons for suggesting use of a projection window of less than 5 years. One commenter recommended that CMS update the ACPT annually, similar to the methodology used in the ACO REACH Model. Another commenter recommended that CMS start with a 3-year projection because that is the evidence base for the USPCC. One commenter noted that a 5-year projection period is unprecedentedly long for a prospective trend in the insurance industry. Another commenter expressed concern that the projection may be less accurate in the later years of a 5-year agreement period, and it may make sense for CMS to review the projection annually to adjust for unforeseen changes.

One commenter recommended that the proposed ACPT be piloted before use and prospectively set for 1 year rather than 5, with only positive retrospective adjustments to account for clinical developments such as broad coverage of a new high-cost drug.

More generally, one commenter explained that health care spending trends are affected by many factors that are outside of ACOs' control and hard to predict in advance, including: the emergence of new medical technologies and practice patterns; changes in population health, such as those due to changes in health behaviors or the emergence of new diseases; and macroeconomic developments, which may, for example, affect trends in provider input costs and thus Medicare's payment updates.

Response: As we described in section III.G.5.c.(3) of the proposed rule (87 FR 46163), we selected a 5-year projection horizon to align with the 5-year agreement periods used under the Shared Savings Program. The ACPT factors would remain unchanged throughout the ACO's agreement period in order to provide ACOs with a degree of certainty surrounding a portion of their benchmark updates, while simultaneously insulating a portion of the benchmark update from any potential impacts of their own savings. Updating the projections over the course of the agreement period or using shorter projection windows would remove the benefit of certainty. Indeed, many commenters expressed appreciation that the approach would provide greater stability to the benchmark value and allow ACOs to better predict their benchmarks and have greater visibility into the benchmark calculation.

We disagree with the commenters' suggestion that a 5-year projection window is unprecedented, as OACT routinely projects expenditures for this length of time (and longer) as part of the Medicare Trustees Report. We also note the USPCCs announced in the first quarter of a given year include projections for a total of 4 years (including the year of the announcement), not 3 years.

We recognize that some commenters prefer shorter projection windows because they have concerns about the potential inaccuracies of a longer projection due to the possibility of unforeseen events, such as was experienced with the COVID-19 PHE. We agree with commenters that the COVID-19 PHE has had important implications for utilization patterns and costs of care for Medicare beneficiaries. In the March 31, 2020 COVID-19 IFC (85 FR 19267 and 19268) and the May 8, 2020 COVID-19 IFC (85 FR 27573 through 27587) we adopted several modifications to policies under the Shared Savings Program in response to the PHE, including excluding all Parts A and B FFS payment amounts for an episode of care for treatment of COVID-19 from certain Shared Savings Program calculations (for more information about the program changes in response to the COVID-19 PHE, refer to 87 FR 46198 and 46199). We note that we have proposed to first implement the ACPT and the three-way blend for agreement periods beginning in 2024, which would potentially allow for post-pandemic trends to inform the projections.

We also acknowledge and appreciate commenters' concerns that emergence of new, high-cost technologies can be difficult to predict. As we have discussed elsewhere in this section, Medicare spending projections explicitly account for known new technologies, such as when coverage determinations are announced for treatments undergoing clinical trials. Similarly, in the longer run Medicare spending projections that are necessary for creating the ACPT (which includes 5 performance years) there is generally an assumption made for a component of trend related to new technologies that are not yet known.

In addition, we believe that the proposed guardrail protecting ACOs from incurring additional shared losses under the three-way blend and the proposal to reduce the weight of the ACPT component of the three-way blend if projections diverge from actual expenditure growth due to unforeseen circumstances will effectively mitigate the commenters' concerns about projection error impacting the benchmark updates. Given these considerations, we are finalizing the 5-year projection window as proposed. However, we will continue to monitor the degree to which national expenditures differ from the projections following each performance year over the course of a 5-year projection window to determine whether any changes to the ACPT and the three-way blend are needed. Any such changes would be made through notice and comment rulemaking.

Comment: Of the commenters that addressed the proposal to express the ACPT as a flat dollar amount rather than on a relative basis, one commenter supported the proposed flat dollar approach. One commenter opposed the flat dollar approach to incorporating the ACPT into the three-way blend because it would not take into account regional differences in Medicare prices and spending, citing concerns that the approach would disadvantage ACOs in regions with higher costs and disincentivize participation in those areas.

Another commenter suggested that the projected national growth rates be used directly in the three-way blend rather than the proposed flat dollar amount, arguing that ACOs with high cost populations (such as a higher percentage of dually eligible beneficiaries) would be unfairly disadvantaged by the three-way blend. The commenter pointed to concerns that the proposed methodology under which CMS would divide the risk-adjusted flat dollar amounts by the ACO's historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type to express the flat dollar amount as a relative factor that can be combined with the current two-way blend to compute the three-way blended update would cause the risk-adjusted flat dollar amount to be divided by a disproportionately higher dollar amount for such ACOs, resulting in a lower final ACPT rates. To remedy these concerns, the commenter suggested alternative approaches that would all incorporate the ACPT on a relative rather than flat-dollar basis. Under the commenter's suggested approaches, the projected update would be similar for ACOs with otherwise higher or lower baseline spending.

Response: We appreciate the commenter's suggestions for alternative approaches to incorporating the ACPT into the three-way blend. In the proposed rule (87 FR 46164), we described retrospective modeling we had conducted to examine whether the ACPT should be included in the three-way blend on a relative or flat dollar basis. We found that the risk-adjusted flat dollar amount, on average, resulted in the most favorable benchmark update across ACOs because it was calculated using national per capita expenditures for the assignable population, which typically exceeds per capita expenditures for an ACO's own assigned beneficiaries. In contrast, the alternative options proposed by the commenter would result in a relatively smaller growth rate, on average, being incorporated into the three-way blend, which would lead to smaller benchmark increases on average across ACOs.

We disagree with the commenter's suggestion that ACOs with higher costs would necessarily receive a lower benchmark update under the flat-dollar approach. As proposed, the flat dollar amount used in the one-third ACPT portion of the three-way blend would be risk adjusted to account for differences in severity and case-mix of beneficiaries assigned to each ACO, and the other two-thirds of the three-way blend would still be a percentage reflecting the two-way blend of the national and regional update factors that would tend (all other things equal) to benefit high spending groups.

Comment: Many commenters requested that CMS implement a guardrail to protect ACOs from reductions in shared savings in addition to the proposed guardrail to protect against increases in shared losses under the three-way blend compared to the two-way blended update factor. (Herein, for ease of reference, we refer to such an approach as a “two-sided guardrail.”) Commenters believed it would be necessary to protect ACOs from reductions in shared savings under the three-way blend for a number of reasons.

Several commenters emphasized the importance of shared savings as a source of revenue for ACOs, which (for instance) ACOs use to reinvest and sustain important initiatives. One commenter explained that given the significant investments that ACOs make in staffing, care coordination, infrastructure, and new workflows, it is not sufficient to have the guardrail simply protect against shared losses when an ACO would have earned shared savings under the current update methodology. One commenter specified that ACOs may be hesitant to invest in new initiatives or expand existing initiatives under a benchmark update approach where an ACO is ineligible for shared savings that it would have otherwise received under the two-way blend.

Some commenters noted it would be necessary to guard against reduced shared savings, as well as greater shared losses resulting from downward effects on the benchmark through use of the three-way blend in cases where the ACPT differs from observed national or regional trends. For example, some commenters indicated that a two-sided guardrail would ensure that ACOs are not penalized by unforeseen results or unintended consequences from use of the ACPT under the three-way blend. A few commenters explained that a two-sided guardrail would help to avoid penalizing ACOs in regions with high spending growth with lower benchmarks, since high regional growth rates can be caused by a host of local market factors (for example, opening of new tertiary services) beyond an ACO's control.

Some commenters pointed to the need to ensure no ACOs are negatively impacted by the use of a three-way blend in light of unknowns about the accuracy of a 5-year prospective trend. More specifically, a few commenters indicated that a two-sided guardrail would be needed until CMS and the ACO community are confident that the ACPT and the three-way blend is the most appropriate way to update the benchmark. One commenter suggested implementing a two-sided guardrail for at least the first agreement period under the new policy. One commenter, expressing concern that ACOs with high-cost populations (such as a higher percentage of dually eligible beneficiaries) would be disadvantaged under the ACPT calculation as proposed, urged that CMS protect ACOs against receiving lower benchmarks by updating the benchmark using the higher of the proposed three-way blend or the current two-way blend.

Commenters recommended that CMS allow ACOs to, either automatically or by choice, receive the higher of the two benchmarks calculated under the current two-way blend and the proposed three-way blend, enabling them to avoid both additional shared losses and any lost shared savings they might observe under the proposed changes. Several commenters indicated there would be minimal additional burden placed on CMS under such an approach because CMS would already calculate the two-way trend as a component of the three-way trend.

Response: We appreciate commenters' support for the proposal to establish a guardrail on shared losses. We continue to believe this approach is necessary to safeguard ACOs from incurring additional shared losses purely as a result of the transition to the three-way blend, and we are finalizing this guardrail as proposed.

We decline commenters' suggestions to provide ACOs with the higher of the three-way blended update factor or the two-way national-regional blended update factor, to allow ACOs to maximize savings under their benchmark. We believe that such a two-sided guardrail would create multiple opportunities for individual ACOs to earn additional shared savings payments, rewarding ACOs in circumstances when they may not have improved care or efficiency, which would inflate shared savings payments from the Trust Funds when ACPT projection error favors ACOs. Because a two-sided guardrail would increase total shared savings payments for ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program without corresponding reductions in spending, including one would jeopardize CMS' ability to satisfy the requirements of section 1899(i)(3) of the Act for use of other payment models. We also decline commenters' suggestion to allow ACOs to choose between the two-way or three-way blend. While we acknowledge commenters' point that both the two-way and three-way blend must be calculated as part of determining the three-way blend, we are concerned that allowing ACOs such a choice could result in increased shared savings payments based on selective participation under more generous benchmarks rather than from ACOs redesigning their care processes to lead to improved care for their assigned beneficiaries and lower growth in expenditures.

Comment: A few commenters recommended limiting the degree to which the benchmark increase could be impacted by the transition to the three-way blend from the current two-way blend. Specifically, one commenter indicated that a two-sided guardrail would defeat the purpose of the proposed methodology, and that a different alternative approach was needed to account for variation between regional and national trends beyond the ACO's influence under the three-way blended update factor. The commenter suggested using the two-way blended update factor if the three-way blend deviated from the two-way blend by more than 20 percent of an ACO's savings rate. Several other commenters made a more general suggestion to establish a maximum downward adjustment to ACO benchmarks due to switch to the three-way blend.

Response: We appreciate commenters' concerns that ACOs benchmark updates may be adversely impacted by the transition to the three-way blend. However, we believe that when taken together, the policies already included in the proposal for the ACPT and the three-way blend described in the proposed rule, which we are finalizing as proposed, offer sufficient protection against significant impacts arising from the shift to a three-way blended update factor. As discussed, the ACPT accounts for one-third of the three-way blend. A majority of the blend will continue to be based on actual expenditure growth, and CMS will have discretion to reduce the weight given to the ACPT if unforeseen circumstances cause the national growth to deviate substantially from the projected growth rates. A guardrail will also protect ACOs from incurring additional shared losses as a result of the use of the three-way blend. We believe these policies, when paired with the changes to the regional adjustment and the addition of a prior savings adjustment, as described elsewhere in this final rule, will offer ACOs sufficient protection against any negative impacts to their benchmark updates associated with the transition to the three-way blend.

Comment: Commenters generally supported including a framework to adjust the ACPT in the event of unforeseen circumstances that cause growth rates to diverge substantially from projected trends. However, several commenters suggested that CMS define what constitutes an “unforeseen circumstance” and what situation might require notice and comment rulemaking to adjust the weight of the ACPT in the three-way blend. Some commenters pointed to potential uncertainty for ACOs regarding when an adjustment for unforeseen circumstances might occur, as well as the potential magnitude of such an adjustment. Another commenter explained that CMS would likely face considerable resistance from ACOs if it attempted to reduce the weight on an overly generous ACPT after the fact. However, the commenter further noted that if CMS failed to reduce that weight, the fiscal cost of this proposal would remain large.

More generally, one commenter encouraged CMS to have a mechanism in place to adjust the ACPT growth rate projections when the actual growth rate differs from the projections, but did not specify whether this was in reference to the proposed approach to adjusting the weight placed on the ACPT as a result of unforeseen circumstances, or another approach. Several commenters encouraged CMS not to retrospectively adjust the ACPT downwards.

Response: We are finalizing our proposal that CMS would retain discretion to determine whether an unforeseen circumstance exists that warrants a reduction to the weight of the that would apply to the ACPT in the three-way blend. In the proposed rule, we acknowledged that a variety of circumstances could cause actual expenditure trends to significantly deviate from projections made at the start of the agreement period, which could result in an update factor that significantly differs from actual expenditure trends, and in turn result in ACOs owing excessive shared losses or the Medicare Trust Funds paying out windfall shared savings. As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we anticipate that the types of events that could result in the need for CMS to exercise its discretion to reduce the weight placed on the ACPT could include an economic recession, pandemic, or other factors. We believe that it is important to maintain a degree of flexibility to best respond to the unforeseen circumstances as they may arise. Therefore, we decline at this time to adopt commenters' suggestions to codify specific criteria for determining when an unforeseen circumstance occurs, such as through establishing a definition for unforeseen circumstances.

However, we clarify that we anticipate determining whether an unforeseen circumstance warrants adjustment of the weight placed on the ACPT component of the three-way blend by considering whether it has a material impact across the entire Shared Savings Program. In reducing weight on an overly generous ACPT, we appreciate the need, as reflected in the commenter's concern, to balance the interests of ACOs and protecting the Trust Funds from related costs. We may consider whether it would be appropriate to develop a materiality threshold to provide further clarity for ACOs and CMS of the magnitude of the change that would warrant reduction of the weight placed on the ACPT, and may revisit this issue in future notice and comment rulemaking.

In response to commenters' concerns that we may adjust the amount of the ACPT downward during an ACO's agreement period, we note that we are finalizing our proposal to establish the ACPT at the outset of an agreement period, based on one or more annualized growth rates. Under this approach we would not adjust the ACPT projections over the course of the agreement period. Rather, we would only reduce the weight that would be given to the ACPT in the three-way blend when necessary to mitigate unforeseen circumstances.

Comment: Some commenters urged CMS to provide transparency into the calculation of the ACPT. One commenter encouraged CMS to provide ACOs with guidance and education about the new benchmarking approach before implementing it in 2024. Another commenter explained that there are many unknowns with the prospective trend proposal that potentially impact ACO financial stability and predictability. To help mitigate unforeseen impacts of this new blend, the commenter requested that CMS provide greater detail and transparency regarding the national, regional, and ACPT calculations, as well as the definition of region. One commenter requested that CMS provide additional details of modeling or other analyses of the ACPT and three-way blended update factor.

Response: We will consider these suggestions as we develop future education and outreach plans. We anticipate including the amount of the ACPT for an ACO's agreement period in the ACO's final historical benchmark report, which is made available to ACOs approximately 6 months into the first performance year of the ACO's agreement period. We note this is a somewhat more protracted timeline than we originally anticipated for publicizing the final ACPT value, as described in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule. However, this will allow time for three months of claims run-out and for final HCC risk scores for benchmark year 3 and other inputs needed for ACPT production to be available. We also anticipate updating the Shared Savings Program's publicly available specifications documents, programmatic resources and materials, and the aggregate reports provided to ACOs to include information about how we calculate and apply the ACPT.

Comment: Commenters suggested alternatives to the proposed implementation timeline for transitioning to the use a three-way blend that incorporates the ACPT to update an ACO's historical benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. Some commenters recommended that CMS allow currently participating ACOs, including ACOs entering an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2023, to elect for the three-way blended update factor to apply beginning in PY 2024, so that the ACOs do not have to enter a new agreement period for the revised approach to apply. Several commenters noted that 2023 starters that complete a 5-year agreement period and renew to continue their participation in the Shared Savings Program would not be under the revised benchmark update methodology until 2028. A few commenters expressed concern that ACOs interested in entering the Shared Savings Program for a 2023 start date may look to defer their entry to 2024 in order to benefit from these policies. One commenter, suggesting ACOs be allowed to opt in to use of the three-way blend, recommended that CMS provide ACOs with the ACPT prior to the start of the agreement period.

A few commenters suggested that CMS apply the three-way blended update factor to all ACOs, including those within existing agreement periods, beginning with PY 2024. These commenters also indicated that such an approach would avoid certain administrative burdens on ACOs and CMS, resulting from applying differing methodologies to distinct groups of ACOs or from ACOs terminating their current agreements and entering into new agreements for 2024 in order to benefit from the proposed changes.

In contrast, a few commenters suggested that CMS implement a more gradual phased transition to the three-way blend. For example, one commenter recommended allowing ACOs, whose final performance year of their current agreement period is PY 2023, to defer the transition to the three-way blend for up to one full agreement period to allow these ACOs to better understand the financial impact of the use of the ACPT.

Response: We believe commenters' suggested approaches to allow ACOs to opt in to the application of the three-way blend during an agreement period with a start date before 2024, or to allow ACOs with start dates on or after 2024 to delay adoption of the approach, could lead to selective participation, and prove operationally challenging to implement. Accordingly, we decline commenters' various suggestions for alternative approaches to the timing of applicability of the ACPT, and we are finalizing as proposed that the three-way blended update factor will apply to ACOs entering agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

The three-way blended update factor is one of multiple changes we are finalizing to the Shared Savings Program's financial methodology and participation options, to be applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. We believe this timing will provide ACOs with sufficient time to consider the policies we are finalizing in this final rule, and prepare to apply to enter or continue their participation in the Shared Savings Program, as well as for CMS to prepare to implement these significant changes. Given the voluntary nature of participation in the Shared Savings Program, we agree with commenters that ACOs will likely carefully weigh the timing of their program entry, or renewal (in the case of currently participating ACOs), relative to the timing of applicability of the Shared Savings Program's requirements, including the modifications to the benchmarking methodology we are finalizing in this final rule.

We acknowledge that ACOs in the process of completing the application cycle for the 2023 start date, which concludes in early December 2022, will have limited time to evaluate the final policies adopted in this final rule prior to deciding whether to enter the Shared Savings Program (if eligible) for an agreement period starting on January 1, 2023. Further, we recognize that 2023 starters, and currently participating ACOs that entered an agreement period in earlier years, may wish to pursue the option to early renew for a new agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, by terminating their current agreement and immediately entering a new agreement period, so that they would have the opportunity to participate under the revised benchmarking methodology. (Refer to paragraph (2) of the definition of “renewing ACO” in § 425.20, and the application procedures set forth in § 425.224.) We note that early renewing, like renewing upon completion of an agreement period, will result in rebasing of the ACO's historical benchmark, and will affect the ACO's eligibility for certain participation options (refer to section III.G.2. of this final rule), as well as the agreement period the ACO is entering for purposes of applying program requirements that phase-in over multiple agreement periods (refer to § 425.600(f)).

Lastly, in response to the commenter that suggested we allow ACOs whose final performance year of their current agreement period is PY 2023 to defer transition to the three-way blend for an agreement period, we note, as an initial matter, that under the policy adopted in the December 2018 final rule, which extended the length of the agreement periods to 5 performance years (or 6 performance years for ACOs that started an agreement period on July 1, 2019), there are currently no ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program whose agreement period would conclude on December 31, 2023, unless the ACO's agreement is terminated early. Furthermore, we do not believe it would be appropriate to allow ACOs to defer transition to the three-way blend as such an approach would create perverse incentives for ACOs to game benchmarking policies we are phasing-out (namely use of the two-way blend instead of the three-way blend) in combination with other modified benchmarking policies and participation options that would be applicable to ACOs entering agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

After consideration of the public comments, we are finalizing without modification our proposal to update an ACO's historical benchmark based on a three-way blend of the ACPT and blended national-regional growth rates, for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. We are also finalizing as proposed the modifications to our regulations to incorporate the use of the three-way blend. The use of the three-way blend, the associated guardrail, and the discretion for CMS to adjust the weight of the ACPT in the three-way blend in the event of unforeseen circumstances are specified in paragraph (b) of a new provision at § 425.652, which would govern the process for establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. We also specify within § 425.652(b) the other components of the update factor, namely the calculation of the national and regional components of the blend, which follows the same approach specified under § 425.601(b), with conforming changes to reflect the use within a three-way blend. Further, we specify the calculation of the ACPT in a new provision at § 425.660. We anticipate evaluating and monitoring the impact of the ACPT on ACO historical benchmarks, and would address any necessary refinements to the approach through future notice and comment rulemaking.

(4) Adjusting ACO Benchmarks To Account for Prior Savings

(a) Background

Under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act, an ACO's benchmark must be reset at the start of each agreement period. Section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act provides the Secretary with discretion to adjust the historical benchmark by “such other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate.” Pursuant to this authority, as described in the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32785 through 32791), we established a prior savings adjustment that applied when establishing the benchmark for ACOs entering a second agreement period beginning on January 1, 2016, to account for the average per capita amount of savings generated during the ACO's prior agreement period. 337

337 The relevant provision was originally finalized at § 425.602(c) in the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32842). In the June 2016 final rule, we removed paragraph (c) from § 425.602 and included this provision within paragraph (b) of § 425.603 (81 FR 37968, 38014).

The prior savings adjustment adopted in the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32788 through 32791) was designed to adjust an ACO's benchmark for its second agreement period to account for the average per capita amount of savings generated by the ACO across the 3 performance years of its first agreement period. This average per capita amount also accounted for the ACO's quality performance in each performance year under its first agreement period. We limited the adjustment to the benchmark for the second agreement period to the average number of assigned beneficiaries (expressed as person years) 338 under the ACO's first agreement period in order to help ensure that the adjustment did not exceed the amount of net savings generated by the ACO during the first agreement period due to ACO participant list changes that may increase the number of assigned beneficiaries in the second agreement period (80 FR 32789). In calculating the adjustment, we used data from the ACO's finalized financial reconciliation reports for the performance years which corresponded to the benchmark years for the ACO's second agreement period. As described in the June 2015 final rule, the calculation included the following steps (80 FR 32789):

338 To calculate person years: We sum the number of Shared Savings Program-eligible months for each assigned beneficiary for each Medicare enrollment type; we then divide this number by 12 (the number of months in a calendar year). Refer to the Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses and Assignment Methodology Specifications (version #10, January 2022), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-1 (Section 3.1 Calculating ACO-Assigned Beneficiary Expenditures).

• Step 1: Determine whether the ACO generated net savings. For each performance year we determined an average per capita amount reflecting the quotient of the ACO's total updated benchmark expenditures minus total performance year expenditures divided by performance year assigned beneficiary person years. However, the ACO's total updated benchmark expenditures minus total performance year expenditures could not exceed the performance payment limit for the relevant track. If the sum of the per capita amounts for the 3 performance years was positive, the ACO would be determined to have net savings and we would proceed with Steps 2 and 3. If the sum of the per capita amounts for the 3 performance years was zero or negative, we did not make any adjustment to the ACO's rebased benchmark to account for any savings the ACO may have generated under its prior agreement period.

• Step 2: Calculate an average per capita amount of savings reflecting the ACO's final sharing rates based on quality performance. We averaged the performance year per capita amounts determined in Step 1 to determine the average per capita amount for the agreement period. We also determined the ACO's average final sharing rate, based on an average of the ACO's quality performance in each performance year of the agreement period. Therefore, the average per capita amount of savings would account for those situations where an ACO's sharing rate for a performance year was set equal to zero (based on the ACO's failure to meet the quality performance requirements in that year). We then calculated an average per capita amount of savings which was the product of the average performance year per capita amount and the average sharing rate based on quality performance.

• Step 3: Add the average per capita amount of savings determined in Step 2 to the ACO's rebased historical benchmark. The additional per capita amount was applied to the ACO's rebased historical benchmark for a number of assigned beneficiaries (expressed as person years) not to exceed the average number of assigned beneficiaries (expressed as person years) under the ACO's first agreement period.

As we explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46169), reinstituting a prior savings adjustment would be broadly in line with our interest in addressing dynamics to ensure sustainability of the benchmarking methodology. Specifically, such an adjustment would help to mitigate the rebasing ratchet effect on an ACO's benchmark by returning to an ACO's benchmark an amount that reflects its success in lowering growth in expenditures while meeting the program's quality performance standard in the performance years corresponding to the benchmark years for the ACO's new agreement period. Furthermore, we explained our belief that returning dollar value to benchmarks through a prior savings adjustment could help address an ACO's effects on expenditures in its regional service area that result in reducing the regional adjustment added to the historical benchmark. We also noted that when applying two adjustments in establishing the benchmark—a prior savings adjustment and a regional adjustment—there are number of considerations related to the potential interactions between these adjustments. We proposed that these interactions would determine the extent to which efficient ACOs would receive positive regional adjustments to their benchmark and the extent to which less efficient ACOs could use their savings from a prior agreement period to offset a negative regional adjustment, which could help foster their continued participation in the Shared Savings Program.

(b) Revisions

In section III.G.5.c.(4).(b) of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46169 through 46179), we proposed to incorporate an adjustment for prior savings that would apply in the establishment of benchmarks for renewing ACOs and re-entering ACOs entering an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years and that were reconciled for one or more of the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of their agreement period. We considered a variety of approaches to calculating the prior savings adjustment and preferred an approach that would resemble the policy implemented for renewing ACOs entering a second agreement period in 2016 but that included additional steps to account for subsequent changes in Shared Savings Program policies. Specifically, these steps would account for the impact of the regional adjustment on the ACO's benchmark and attribute prior savings to re-entering ACOs. 339

339 According to § 425.20, re-entering ACO means an ACO that does not meet the definition of a renewing ACO and meets either of the following conditions: (1) Is the same legal entity as an ACO, as defined according to § 425.20, that previously participated in the program and is applying to participate in the program after a break in participation, because it is either—(i) An ACO whose participation agreement expired without having been renewed; or (ii) An ACO whose participation agreement was terminated under §§ 425.218 or 425.220. (2) Is a new legal entity that has never participated in the Shared Savings Program and is applying to participate in the program and more than 50 percent of its ACO participants were included on the ACO participant list under § 425.118, of the same ACO in any of the 5 most recent performance years prior to the agreement start date.

In the June 2016 final rule (81 FR 37962 through 37965), we explained our belief that it was important to forgo the adjustment to account for shared savings generated by the ACO under its prior agreement period when transitioning to a benchmark rebasing methodology that incorporates an adjustment for regional FFS expenditures. We anticipated that for ACOs generating savings, a rebasing methodology that accounts for regional FFS expenditures would generally leave a similar or slightly greater share of measured savings in an ACO's rebased benchmark for its subsequent agreement period. At the time, we disagreed with comments suggesting that we either maintain the adjustment for prior savings or broaden its scope to make it more generous because we believed that maintaining an adjustment for prior savings alongside a regional adjustment could allow benchmarks to become overly inflated for some ACOs (particularly those benefiting from the regional adjustment). We also believed that continued application of the adjustment for prior savings would further tie an ACO's benchmark to its past performance rather than making it more reflective of FFS spending in the ACO's region, which was an important aim of revisions to the rebasing methodology in the June 2016 final rule (81 FR 37965).

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we explained our belief that based on our experience with rebasing under the current benchmarking methodology, it would be timely to re-introduce a prior savings adjustment to ensure rebased benchmarks continue to serve as a reasonable baseline when benchmark years correspond to performance years of the ACO's preceding agreement period. However, we explained our belief that the rebased benchmarks of ACOs that are lower spending compared to their regional service area and that generated savings in their benchmark years could become overinflated if we were to allow for both a prior savings adjustment and a positive regional adjustment. To prevent this from occurring, we believed that adjusting an ACO's benchmark based on the higher of either the prior savings adjustment or the ACO's positive regional adjustment would be appropriate.

Additionally, we believed it would be appropriate to use a prior savings adjustment to offset negative regional adjustments for ACOs that are higher spending compared to their regional service area. This would permit ACOs that have generated savings in prior years to receive a relatively higher benchmark than under the current approach, which would incorporate a negative regional adjustment. We recognized that there are interactions between this proposed approach and the proposal to reduce the amount of the negative regional adjustment described in section III.G.5.c.(5) of the proposed rule. We accounted for these interactions in developing the proposed methodology for determining the prior savings adjustment.

In order to calculate the prior savings adjustment, we proposed to calculate the simple average of per capita savings or losses generated by the ACO during the 3 performance years that immediately precede the start of the ACO's current agreement period, and therefore, constitute the benchmark years of the current agreement period. The per capita savings for each performance year would be determined as the quotient of the ACO's total updated benchmark expenditures minus total performance year expenditures divided by performance year assigned beneficiary person years. We noted that we would use all savings generated during each of the prior 3 performance years in the prior savings adjustment, not just savings that met or exceeded the ACO's MSR for that prior performance year. This would include savings generated by ACOs that were participating in an agreement period under the BASIC track that did not meet the MSR but would meet the expanded criteria to qualify for shared savings as proposed in section III.G.5.f. of the proposed rule. An ACO would be eligible for the prior savings adjustment if the ACO generates positive average prior savings across the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of its current agreement period. If an ACO is not eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment, the ACO would receive the regional adjustment to its benchmark.

In calculating an ACO's average per capita prior savings over the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of its agreement period, we believed a safeguard would be needed to ensure that ACOs that achieved savings for a performance year that serves as a benchmark year for the current agreement period, but were ineligible to receive a shared savings payment due to noncompliance with Shared Savings Program requirements, are not subsequently eligible to have a portion of those savings included in their historical benchmark. Without such a safeguard, we would be rewarding an ACO, despite its noncompliance, through a higher benchmark in its subsequent agreement period. This would conflict with the sanction imposed on the ACO for its noncompliance during the performance year(s) of its prior agreement period. Accordingly, we proposed that if an ACO was ineligible to share in savings for any performance year in the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of its agreement period due to noncompliance with Shared Savings Program requirements, we would set at zero the per capita amount of savings for the affected performance year(s) when calculating the prior savings adjustment.

There are a variety of reasons that could result in an ACO's ineligibility to receive a shared savings payment due to noncompliance. In accordance with §§ 425.605(c)(2), and 425.610(c)(2), an ACO does not qualify to receive shared savings for a performance year if it failed to meet the quality performance standard as specified under § 425.512 (also refer to section III.G.4.b. of this final rule for modifications to the use of quality performance in determining shared savings and shared losses) or otherwise did not maintain its eligibility to participate in the Shared Savings Program. Furthermore, and to clarify the related explanation from the proposed rule, an ACO will not receive any shared savings payments during the time it is under a corrective action plan (CAP) for avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, and is not eligible to receive shared savings for the performance year attributable to the time that necessitated the CAP (the time period during which the ACO avoided at risk beneficiaries) (§ 425.316(b)(2)(ii)).

We proposed to apply a prior savings adjustment in establishing the historical benchmark for re-entering ACOs that meet the eligibility criteria for the adjustment. Under § 425.20, a re-entering ACO means an ACO that is not a renewing ACO and that is either the same legal entity as an ACO that previously participated in the program or a new legal entity that has never participated in the program and more than 50 percent of its ACO participants were included on the ACO participant list under § 425.118 of the same ACO in any of the 5 most recent performance years prior to the agreement start date. For new ACOs that are identified as a re-entering ACO, we proposed to calculate the average per capita prior savings based on the prior performance of the ACO in which 50 percent or more of the ACO participants previously participated. We attribute various aspects of this prior ACO to the re-entering ACO for purposes of determining its eligibility to participate in the Shared Savings Program (§ 425.224), and to determine the agreement period the ACO is entering for purposes of applying program requirements that phase-in over multiple agreement periods (§ 425.600(f)). We noted that we believed it would also be appropriate to attribute to the re-entering ACO the prior savings of this prior ACO. Therefore, in calculating the average per capita prior savings for ACOs identified as re-entering ACOs, we would include the per capita savings or losses of the prior ACO in the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of the re-entering ACO's agreement period. This calculation would exclude from the prior savings adjustment any savings generated for performance years in which the prior ACO was ineligible to share in savings because of noncompliance with Shared Savings Program requirements. This safeguard would help to ensure that we would not reward ACOs for circumstances that may have led to their termination from the program, including circumstances that may have led to the formation of a new ACO.

We proposed to apply a proration factor to the prior savings adjustment to account for situations where an ACO's assigned beneficiary population is larger in the benchmark years when calculated using the ACO's certified ACO participant list and assignment methodology for the current performance year, than the ACO's assigned beneficiary population was when the ACO was reconciled for the 3 performance years preceding the start of its current agreement period. Although this proration approach was not described with much specificity in the earlier rulemaking, we explained that this proration factor would be calculated and implemented in a manner that would be mathematically equivalent to the cap on the prior savings adjustment that was adopted in the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32789).

Mathematically, to apply this proration factor we would calculate a ratio between: (1) the ACO's average person years for the 3 performance years that constitute the benchmark years for the ACO's current agreement period (regardless of whether these performance years occurred over one or multiple prior agreement periods) and (2) the average person years in the 3 benchmark years for the ACO's current agreement period calculated using the ACO's certified ACO participant list and assignment methodology for the current performance year. Increases in beneficiary assignment would therefore result in a ratio less than 1, while decreases in assignment would result in a ratio greater than 1. This ratio would be capped at 1 to avoid increasing the per capita prior savings adjustment if the average number of beneficiaries assigned to the ACO across the 3 benchmark years of its current agreement period is lower than the average number of beneficiaries assigned during the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of the ACO's current agreement period. This proration factor would be multiplied by the average positive per capita prior savings for the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of the ACO's current agreement period to produce the pro-rated average per capita prior savings. We explained that prorating for growth in assignment would ensure that the prior savings adjustment does not exceed the amount of cumulative savings generated by the ACO during the performance years that constitute the benchmark years for its current agreement period.

We noted that there are a number of factors affecting the size of the ACO's assigned population between when CMS determined assignment for the performance year under the prior agreement period, and when CMS determines assignment for the corresponding benchmark year of the ACO's current agreement period, thereby necessitating the calculation of the proration factor at the start of the ACO's new agreement period. Specifically, changes in the size of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population could be due to the addition and removal of ACO participants or ACO providers/suppliers in accordance with § 425.118(b), a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection under § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), or changes to the beneficiary assignment methodology specified in 42 CFR part 425, subpart E. These circumstances also could arise during the course of an ACO's agreement period, and thereby also affect benchmark year assignment. Therefore, we proposed that for the second and each subsequent performance year during the term of the current agreement period, we would redetermine this proration factor under § 425.652(a)(9)(iv) to account for changes in the ACO's assigned beneficiary population in the benchmark years of the ACO's current agreement period, for the aforementioned reasons.

We further proposed to account for circumstances when an ACO was not reconciled for one or more of the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of its current agreement period in the calculation of average per capita prior savings and the proration factor. ACOs that renew their agreement periods early or are a re-entering ACO may not be reconciled for one or more of the 3 years preceding the start of their current agreement period depending upon the timing of the expiration or termination of their prior agreement period and the start of their new agreement period. We proposed that if an ACO (or the prior ACO, if the ACO is identified as a re-entering ACO) was not reconciled during any of the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of its current agreement period, the ACO would receive zero savings or losses in the calculation of average per capita prior savings for the relevant year(s). We noted that we believed this would be appropriate because the purpose of the prior savings adjustment is to return to an ACO's benchmark a portion of the savings experienced by beneficiaries assigned to the ACO during the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of its current agreement period and CMS has no way to determine whether the ACO would have generated savings or losses during performance years it was not reconciled for. Excluding these years entirely from the calculation of average per capita prior savings would unduly increase the weight on the other year(s) included in the prior savings adjustment calculation for which the ACO received financial reconciliation results.

In contrast, we believed it would be appropriate to exclude years for which the ACO (or the prior ACO, if the ACO is identified as a re-entering ACO) was not reconciled when calculating the proration factor. The purpose of the proration factor is to account for situations where an ACO's assigned beneficiary population calculated at financial reconciliation in the 3 years preceding the start of the ACO's agreement period (numerator) is smaller than the ACO's assigned beneficiary population identified for those same years using the ACO's certified ACO participant list and assignment methodology for the current performance year (denominator).

If an ACO was not reconciled for one or more of the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of its current agreement period, it would naturally have zero assigned beneficiaries determined at financial reconciliation for such years, which would factor into the numerator of the proration factor if such years were considered. However, the ACO would have positive beneficiary counts in the 3 years preceding the start of its current agreement period generated using the ACO's certified ACO participant list and assignment methodology for the current performance year, which would factor into the denominator of the proration factor if such years were considered. Thus, if the numerator and the denominator were both calculated as averages over 3 years, incorporating years for which the ACO was not reconciled in the calculation of the proration factor would artificially decrease the proration factor and lead to a smaller pro-rated average per capita prior savings for the ACO. Alternatively, if the numerator were calculated as an average that excludes performance years for which the ACO was not reconciled (that is, as an average across less than 3 years, including only those years an ACO was reconciled for) and the denominator was calculated as an average that included all 3 years preceding the beginning of the ACO's agreement period, the direction of the impact on the proration factor would depend on whether the number of assigned beneficiaries calculated using an ACO's current certified ACO participant list and assignment methodology in the benchmark years for which the ACO was not reconciled exceeds the number of assigned beneficiaries in the other benchmark years, and by how much. Therefore, we saw no compelling reason to include any of the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of an ACO's agreement period for which the ACO was not reconciled in the numerator or the denominator of the proration factor and proposed to remove such years from the calculation of the proration factor. This would ensure that the proration factor compares average person years determined for prior performance years at financial reconciliation (numerator) to average person years determined using the ACO's current certified ACO participant list and assignment methodology (denominator) across a consistent set of years preceding the start of the ACO's agreement period.

For instance, if an ACO were only reconciled in 2 of the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of its current agreement period, the proration factor would be calculated as a ratio between: (1) the ACO's average person years for the 2 performance years for which the ACO was reconciled (regardless of whether these performance years occurred over one or multiple prior agreement periods); and (2) the average person years in the 2 benchmark years of the ACO's current agreement period which correspond to these same 2 performance years, calculated using the ACO's certified ACO participant list and assignment methodology for the current performance year. Tables 65 and 66 provide examples of the proration factor calculation when an ACO was not reconciled for one of the 3 performance years preceding the start of its agreement period. We did not propose parallel adjustments to the calculation of the proration factor if an ACO was ineligible to share in savings for any performance year in the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of its agreement period due to noncompliance with Shared Savings Program requirements. We noted that we believed this would be appropriate because if an ACO was ineligible to share in savings in one of these years due to a noncompliance issue, we could still use the ACO's assigned beneficiary person years calculated at financial reconciliation in each of the 3 years preceding the start of the ACO's agreement period in the numerator of the proration factor, and could calculate the proration factor using the same method we would use for other ACOs that were reconciled in each of the 3 performance years immediately preceding the beginning of the agreement period.

We proposed to calculate the final prior savings adjustment separately depending on whether an ACO is higher or lower spending relative to its regional service area. In order to avoid overinflating the benchmarks of ACOs that are lower spending relative to their regional service area by granting them both a prior savings adjustment and a positive regional adjustment, we believed it would be appropriate to apply the higher of the prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment. In contrast, for ACOs that are higher spending relative to their region, we believed it would be appropriate to apply the prior savings adjustment to offset their negative regional adjustments partially or in full.

For an ACO that is lower spending than its regional service area, we proposed that the ACO would receive an adjustment equal to the higher of the following: (1) its positive regional adjustment; and (2) a prior savings adjustment equal to the lesser of—(i) 50 percent of its pro-rated positive average per capita prior savings and (ii) 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries. The national assignable per capita FFS expenditure cap used in this calculation would be expressed as a single per capita value by weighting the national per capita FFS expenditure averages for assignable beneficiaries of each Medicare enrollment type according to the ACO's person-year based enrollment proportions. The regional adjustment used in this calculation would be the ACO's regional adjustment determined as specified in the proposed new provision at § 425.656 (which would include the proposed modifications to the methodology for determining the regional adjustment as outlined in section III.G.5.c.(5) of the proposed rule) and expressed as a single value by taking a person-year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment type-specific regional adjustment values. We believed that the cap on the prior savings adjustment at 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries would be necessary to ensure the amount of the prior savings adjustment does not inflate an ACO's benchmark to the point where the ACO is likely to generate shared savings without decreasing expenditures. The cap at 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries would align with the existing cap on positive regional adjustments (see § 425.601(a)(8)(ii)(C)). Further, we noted that the existing 5 percent cap on regional adjustments is adjusted to exclude episodes of care for treatment of COVID-19 in accordance with § 425.611(c)(2)(iii). Consistent with this current approach, we proposed to adjust the cap on prior savings adjustments to exclude episodes of care for treatment of COVID-19, and to specify this adjustment through modifications to the regulation at § 425.611(c)(2)(iii).

We proposed to apply the 50 percent scaling factor to the pro-rated positive average per capita prior savings because we believed it would be important to consider a measure of the sharing rate used in determining the shared savings payment the ACO earned in the applicable performance years under its prior agreement period(s). We noted that the earlier version of the prior savings adjustment adopted in the June 2015 final rule also included a provision to scale the average per capita prior savings by a factor related to the sharing rate. Under this former policy, the ACO's average per capita prior savings were multiplied against its average final sharing rate across the prior agreement period. The average final sharing rate was determined using an average of the ACO's quality performance in each performance year of the prior agreement period (80 FR 32789). As proposed, the policy of applying a 50 percent scaling factor to the pro-rated positive average per capita prior savings would be a simplification of the older approach. The sharing rates vary within the Shared Savings Program's tracks/levels. Within an ACO's agreement period under the BASIC track's glide path, differing sharing rates will apply depending on the ACO's level of participation. Under the BASIC track, the maximum sharing rate is 40 percent under one-sided model Levels A and B, and 50 percent under two-sided model Levels C, D, and E (§ 425.605(d)). Under the ENHANCED track the maximum sharing rate is 75 percent (§ 425.610(d)). We also noted several proposals described in the proposed rule would affect the sharing rates: the proposal to apply sharing rates not to exceed one-half of the maximum amount within each Level of the BASIC track for eligible low revenue ACOs (section III.G.5.f. of the proposed rule); and the proposal to use a sliding scale in determining shared savings based on the ACO's quality performance for ACOs that meet the proposed alternative quality performance standard (section III.G.4.b. of the proposed rule). For simplicity, we believed it would be appropriate to apply a consistent scaling factor in calculating the prior savings adjustment when an ACO is lower spending relative to its regional service area. We believed that a 50 percent scaling factor would be appropriate because it represents a middle ground between the maximum sharing rate of 75 percent under the ENHANCED track and the lower sharing rates available under the BASIC track, and also takes into account the opportunity for ACOs to earn shared savings on a sliding scale under the proposed alternative quality performance standard.

For ACOs that are higher spending relative to their regional service area, we proposed to calculate the final adjustment to the benchmark by adding the pro-rated average per capita prior savings to the ACO's negative regional adjustment calculated as proposed in section III.G.5.c.(5) of the proposed rule and in the proposed new regulation at § 425.656. If this sum is positive, we proposed that the ACO would receive a prior savings adjustment in place of the negative regional adjustment equal to the lesser of 50 percent of the positive sum and 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries. We proposed to apply the 50 percent scaling factor to the positive sum of the ACO's regional adjustment and the pro-rated average per capita prior savings instead of to the total pro-rated average per capita savings in order to strengthen incentives for ACOs to remain in the program by increasing the portion of the pro-rated average per capita savings that would be added to the negative regional adjustment in determining the final adjustment to the benchmark. The cap on the adjustment at 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries would mirror the proposed methodology described previously for determining the prior savings adjustment for ACOs with a positive regional adjustment. If the sum of the ACO's negative regional adjustment and its pro-rated average per capita prior savings is negative, the ACO would receive a reduced negative regional adjustment equal to the negative sum. In this case, the prior savings adjustment would not be subject to a 50 percent scaling factor because we believed that it would be appropriate to give the ACO the full benefit of generated prior savings when doing so would still not result in an overall positive adjustment to the benchmark that would be likely to inflate the ACO's benchmark. We believed this approach would also strengthen the incentive for ACOs that are higher spending than their regional service area to remain in the program and continue generating savings. We noted that we were also proposing to reduce the current 5 percent cap on negative regional adjustments to 1.5 percent (as specified in section III.G.5.c.(5) of the proposed rule). We explained that if that proposal was finalized, the sum of the pro-rated average per capita prior savings and the negative regional adjustment would, necessarily, be less than 1.5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries.

We proposed to use the following steps to calculate the prior savings adjustment:

• Step 1: Calculate total per capita savings or losses in each performance year that constitutes a benchmark year for the current agreement period. For each performance year we would determine an average per capita amount reflecting the quotient of the ACO's total updated benchmark expenditures minus total performance year expenditures divided by performance year assigned beneficiary person years. CMS would apply the following requirements in determining the amount of per capita savings or losses for each performance year:

++ The per capita savings or losses would be set to zero for a performance year if the ACO was not reconciled for the performance year.

++ If an ACO generated savings for a performance year but was not eligible to receive a shared savings payment for that year due to noncompliance with Shared Savings Program requirements, the per capita savings for that year would be set to zero.

++ For a new ACO that is identified as a re-entering ACO, per capita savings or losses would be determined based on the per capita savings or losses of the ACO in which the majority of the ACO participants in the re-entering ACO were participating.

• Step 2: Calculate average per capita savings. Calculate an average per capita amount of savings by taking a simple average of the values for each of the 3 performance years as determined in Step 1, including values of zero, if applicable. CMS would use the average per capita amount of savings to determine the ACO's eligibility for the prior savings adjustment as follows:

++ If the average per capita value is less than or equal to zero, the ACO would not be eligible for a prior savings adjustment. The ACO would receive the regional adjustment to its benchmark.

++ If the average per capita value is positive, the ACO would be eligible for a prior savings adjustment.

• Step 3: Apply a proration factor to the per capita savings calculated in Step 2 equal to the ratio of the average person years for the 3 performance years that immediately precede the start of the ACO's current agreement period (regardless of whether these 3 performance years fall in one or more prior agreement periods), and the average person years in benchmark years for the ACO's current agreement period, capped at 1. If the ACO was not reconciled for one or more of the 3 years preceding the start of the ACO's current agreement period, the person years from that year (or years) would be excluded from the averages in the numerator and the denominator of this ratio. For a new ACO that is identified as a re-entering ACO, the person years of the ACO in which the majority of the ACO participants of the re-entering ACO were participating would be used in the numerator of the calculation. This ratio would be redetermined for each performance year during the agreement period in the event of any changes to the number of average person years in the benchmark years as a result of changes to the ACO's certified ACO participant list, a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection under § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), or changes to the beneficiary assignment methodology.

• Step 4: Determine final adjustment to benchmark. Compare the pro-rated positive average per capita savings from Step 3 with the ACO's regional adjustment, determined as specified in the proposed new regulation at § 425.656, expressed as a single per capita value by taking a person-year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment type-specific regional adjustment values.

++ If the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is negative or zero, calculate the sum of the regional adjustment value and the pro-rated positive average per capita savings value and determine the final adjustment as follows:

—If the sum is positive, the ACO would receive a prior savings adjustment in place of the negative regional adjustment equal to the lesser of 50 percent of the sum of the pro-rated average per capita savings and the regional adjustment and 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3. The adjustment would be applied as a flat dollar amount 340 to the historical benchmark expenditures for each of the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

340 In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we referred to use of a “flat rate” in this description. However, for clarity and consistency with the proposed regulatory text at § 425.652(a)(8)(iii)(A)( 1 ), we believe it is more appropriate to refer to this quantity as a “flat dollar amount,” a term that is also used in certain descriptions of the application of the prior savings adjustment to historical benchmark expenditures by Medicare enrollment type in this section of this final rule. This clarification of terminology does not reflect a methodological change.

—If this sum is negative, this would constitute the amount of the negative regional adjustment applied to the ACO's historical benchmark. The adjustment would be applied as a flat dollar amount to the historical benchmark expenditures for the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

++ If the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is positive, the ACO would receive an adjustment to the benchmark equal to the higher of the following:

—The positive regional adjustment amount. The adjustment would be applied separately to the historical benchmark expenditures for each of the following populations of beneficiaries according to the methodology for calculating the regional adjustment (as proposed under § 425.656(c)): ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

—A prior savings adjustment equal to the lesser of 50 percent of the pro-rated positive average per capita savings value and 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for Parts A and B services in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3. The adjustment would be applied as a flat dollar amount to the historical benchmark expenditures for each of the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we noted that an implication of using an ACO's prior performance to calculate the prior savings adjustment is that at the time we determine the preliminary historical benchmarks, an ACO entering a new agreement period that completed a performance year that corresponds to BY3 of its new agreement period will not have prior savings data yet available for that year. In this case, we would anticipate completing financial reconciliation for that performance year midway through the first performance year of the ACO's new agreement period. Accordingly, to determine the preliminary historical benchmark for the first year of the ACO's new agreement period, we would calculate the prior savings adjustment using zero savings in BY3. We would then update the calculation at the time when we calculate the ACO's final historical benchmark to incorporate any applicable BY3 savings. As a result, we acknowledged that production and release of final historical benchmarks may need to be delayed until after the calculation and release of financial reconciliation results for the preceding performance year.

Tables 65 through 68 present hypothetical examples to demonstrate how the adjustment for prior savings would work in practice. For purposes of this final rule, we have made minor updates to the versions of these tables that appeared in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule for clarity and specificity. Numerically and conceptually the tables in this final rule are equivalent to the corresponding tables in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46175 through 46178, Tables 55-58).

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we explained our belief that incorporating an adjustment for prior savings, when the adjustment for prior savings would be more advantageous for ACOs than the regional adjustment, would limit the negative ratchet effects of benchmark rebasing. Under the existing benchmarking methodology, the savings an ACO achieves in one agreement period can reduce its rebased benchmark for the subsequent agreement period either directly by reducing the historical spending that forms the basis for its rebased benchmark or indirectly by reducing regional expenditures in the ACO's regional service area leading to negative (or smaller positive) regional adjustments. Under the proposal to incorporate an adjustment for prior savings, ACOs that have demonstrated savings in the 3 years preceding the start of the agreement period would receive higher benchmarks under the following scenarios:

• ACOs with a negative regional adjustment would receive either a smaller negative regional adjustment or a positive adjustment for prior savings, depending on the relative size of the negative regional adjustment and their pro-rated average prior savings.

• ACOs with a positive regional adjustment whose pro-rated average prior savings multiplied by 50 percent are higher than their regional adjustment would receive a prior savings adjustment that is larger than their regional adjustment would have been under current policy. In contrast, ACOs whose positive regional adjustment is greater than 50 percent of their pro-rated average prior savings would not be impacted by the proposed adjustment for prior savings, and would continue to receive the (larger) regional adjustment.

We stated that we believed the proposal to take the greater of the regional adjustment and the adjustment for prior savings when the regional adjustment is positive, and to net out a negative regional adjustment with the prior savings adjustment when the regional adjustment is negative, would prevent the proposed policy from resulting in unduly large benchmarks. While no ACOs would receive a lower benchmark as a result of this policy, numerical modeling of the proposed policy performed for the proposed rule using data from ACOs beginning an agreement period in PY 2020 suggested that approximately 22 percent of all ACOs reconciled in one or more of their benchmark years would receive a higher benchmark under this policy. Among ACOs that would receive a higher benchmark, the average net effect on per capita benchmark expenditures would be approximately $130 applied as a flat dollar amount to the ACO's historical benchmark expenditures across each of the four Medicare enrollment types (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries).

Since the issuance of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we have performed additional modeling on the proposed prior savings adjustment using data from ACOs beginning an agreement period in PY 2022. The modeling methodology used for ACOs starting an agreement period in PY 2022 was equivalent to the methodology employed for PY 2020 starters. Table 69 summarizes the impact of the prior savings adjustment on ACOs beginning agreement periods on January 1, 2020 and January 1, 2022, and includes a greater level of detail than was included in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule.

Table 69 is divided into several sections that correspond to the various criteria ACOs would be required to meet to receive the proposed prior savings adjustment. The first segment of the Table (rows [A] and [B]) identifies the total number of ACOs entering a new agreement period in the respective performance year (PY 2020 or PY 2022) and what proportion of all ACOs starting an agreement period in that performance year were reconciled in one or more benchmark years. Under our proposal, this is the first eligibility criterion ACOs must meet to receive the prior savings adjustment. The second segment of the Table (row [C]) identifies the proportion of ACOs, among those reconciled in one or more benchmark years, that had positive prorated average prior savings among the ACOs that were reconciled in one or more of their benchmark years, which is the second criterion under our proposed methodology. As proposed, the third criterion that ACOs must meet to receive the prior savings adjustment after identification as being reconciled for one or more benchmark years and having generated positive prorated average prior savings involves comparing the prior savings adjustment with the ACO's aggregate regional adjustment. All ACOs that receive a negative aggregate regional adjustment and have positive prorated average prior savings would receive some benefit from the prior savings adjustment. However, ACOs that receive a positive aggregate regional adjustment and have positive prorated average prior savings would only receive a benefit if the prior savings adjustment is greater than the positive aggregate regional adjustment the ACO otherwise would have received. The third section in Table 69 (row [D]) identifies the proportion of ACOs that were simulated to actually receive the prior savings adjustment among ACOs that were reconciled in one or more benchmark years. The fourth segment in Table 69 (row [E]) summarizes the positive impact of the prior savings adjustment relative to the aggregate regional adjustment the ACO would otherwise have received for ACOs that were simulated to receive the prior savings adjustment.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we explained that when the historical benchmark is adjusted for changes in severity and case mix between BY3 and the performance year as proposed under § 425.652(a)(10) and updated for growth in expenditures between BY3 and the performance year as proposed under § 425.652(b), the portion of the historical benchmark attributable to the prior savings adjustment would also be updated for changes in severity and case mix and growth in expenditures at the enrollment type level. This is consistent with the way in which the regional adjustment that is currently calculated under § 425.601(a)(8) (and would be calculated under proposed § 425.656), is updated at the time of financial reconciliation to reflect changes in severity and case mix and growth in expenditures. If the portion of the benchmark attributable to prior savings were not updated for changes in severity and case mix and growth in expenditures, this could result in smaller benchmarks if the updates for severity and case mix and growth in expenditures are positive (which is typical in past experience). Thus, including the prior savings adjustment in these updates would tend to result in larger benchmarks for those ACOs that receive a prior savings adjustment to their benchmark. In the proposed rule, we explained that we believed this would be appropriate because the prior savings adjustment is based on reductions in expenditures in previous performance years. To the extent that updates to the benchmark for changes in severity and case mix and growth in expenditures suggest that the benchmark should be increased, we believed that it would be appropriate to increase the size of the prior savings adjustment proportionally. Similarly, in the less likely scenario that updates for severity and case mix and growth in expenditures are negative, we believed it would be appropriate to commensurately decrease the size of the prior savings adjustment.

We proposed that the methodology for calculating the average per capita prior savings amount, including the use of a proration factor to account for any upward growth in the ACO's assigned population in the benchmark years of the current agreement as compared to the size of the assigned population when the ACO was reconciled for the corresponding performance years in its prior agreement period(s), would be specified in a new provision at § 425.658 applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. As proposed, this section would also specify the approach to determining an ACO's eligibility for the prior savings adjustment. Further, we proposed to specify in § 425.652(a)(8) the approach for comparing the pro-rated average prior savings amount calculated under § 425.658 with the ACO's regional adjustment amount described in the proposed new provision at § 425.656(c), to determine the applicability of the prior savings adjustment, the regional adjustment, or a combination of these two adjustments. We also proposed to specify at § 425.652(a)(9) that for the second and each subsequent performance year during the term of the ACO's agreement period, we would redetermine the proration factor used in calculating the prior savings adjustment under § 425.658 to account for any changes in the ACO's assigned beneficiary population in the benchmark years due to the addition and removal of ACO participants or ACO providers/suppliers in accordance with § 425.118(b), a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection under § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), or changes to the beneficiary assignment methodology.

We sought comment on this proposal to adjust the ACO's historical benchmark for savings generated in the ACO's prior agreement period.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposal to adjust ACO benchmarks to account for prior savings and our responses:

Comment: Commenters generally supported our proposal to adjust ACO benchmarks for prior savings, although some commenters described certain concerns about or suggested modifications to the calculation methodology, which we summarize elsewhere within this section of this final rule. More specifically, several commenters explained that high performing ACOs would no longer be penalized with lowered benchmarks for past savings and success if this proposal were implemented. Some of these commenters agreed with CMS's proposition that the proposal would provide an incentive for high performing ACOs to remain in the Shared Savings Program. Several commenters supported CMS's acknowledgement of the “ratchet effect” that occurs when ACOs that have generated prior savings receive rebased benchmarks and the introduction of proposals to minimize this effect. These commenters agreed that the prior savings adjustment would help to allow successful ACOs to continue to implement and refine existing programs that lower the cost of care and improve quality instead of finding additional ways to lower cost. One commenter also suggested that the proposal would help offset the related issue of ACOs in rural areas being disproportionately penalized for reducing spending due to having a high regional market share.

Response: We appreciate commenters' support for the proposal to adjust benchmarks to account for savings generated in prior agreement periods.

Comment: Many commenters that supported the proposal to introduce a prior savings adjustment also offered a variety of suggestions to broaden the policy's impact to make it more favorable to ACOs. These suggestions included making the scaling factor used to calculate the adjustment more generous, applying the average savings rate from an ACO's prior agreement period as an upward adjustment to the historical benchmark, increasing the cap on the prior savings adjustment, and including savings earned in other alternative payment models in the calculation of the prior savings adjustment. We summarize and respond to these commenters' suggestions elsewhere within this section of this final rule. One commenter also supported the prior savings adjustment but indicated that they are actively considering dropping out of the Shared Savings Program due to insufficient incentives to remain in the program. This commenter did not share specific suggestions to increase the scope of the prior savings adjustment.

Response: We appreciate these commenters' support of CMS's efforts to implement the prior savings adjustment and their recommendations to make the prior savings adjustment more favorable for ACOs, particularly for ACOs serving high-risk populations.

We believe that the proposed approach strikes an appropriate balance by mitigating the rebasing ratchet effect on an ACO's benchmark through returning to an ACO's benchmark an amount that reflects its success in lowering growth in expenditures while safeguarding the Medicare Trust Funds from excessive shared savings payments that could result from overly inflated benchmarks. As discussed previously in this section, following the publication of the proposed rule we conducted additional modeling on the anticipated impact of the prior savings adjustment. Using data from ACOs beginning agreement periods in PY 2020 to model the impact of the prior savings adjustment suggests that had the prior savings adjustment been in place as proposed in PY 2020, 22.0 percent of the ACOs reconciled in one or more benchmark year would have received a higher benchmark (see Table 69). Across all ACOs receiving a higher benchmark due to the prior savings adjustment, the median benchmark increase would have been approximately $76. For ACOs beginning agreement periods in PY 2022, CMS' modeling suggests that the prior savings adjustment, if implemented as proposed, would have been slightly more advantageous to ACOs. Modeling for PY 2022 suggests that 28.1 percent of ACOs reconciled in one or more benchmark year would have received a higher benchmark, while the median benchmark increase would have been approximately $86.

In light of these findings, we do not believe there is a compelling justification at this time to alter the proposed policy in order to make the prior savings adjustment more generous to ACOs.

Comment: Several commenters suggested that instead of using a 50 percent scaling factor to calculate the prior savings adjustment, CMS should consider using a higher scaling factor that may more closely match the maximum shared savings rate from an ACO's prior agreement period.

Response: We decline the commenters' suggestion to use a scaling factor that more closely matches the maximum shared savings rate from an ACO's prior agreement period. We continue to believe, as stated in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, that a 50 percent scaling factor would be appropriate because it represents a middle ground between the maximum sharing rate of 75 percent under the ENHANCED track and the lower sharing rates available under the BASIC track. Additionally, using a 50 percent scaling factor considers the opportunity for ACOs to earn shared savings on a sliding scale under the proposed alternative quality performance standard (also refer to section III.G.4.b. of this final rule for a discussion of modifications to the use of quality performance in determining shared savings and shared losses). If CMS were to use the maximum shared savings rate from an ACO's previous agreement period in calculating the prior savings adjustment, this scaling factor may be inflated relative to the shared savings rate ACOs actually receive using the sliding scale approach based on ACO quality performance under the alternative quality performance standard that we are adopting in this final rule.

Comment: One commenter noted that CMS should apply the actual average savings rate over the previous 3 years as the upward adjustment factor to the benchmark instead of implementing the prior savings adjustment as proposed, which involves multiplying per capita average prior savings by a scaling factor. The commenter noted that this alternative approach would be particularly beneficial for low cost ACOs.

Response: We decline the commenter's suggestion to use the actual average savings rate from an ACO's prior agreement period as the upward adjustment factor to the historical benchmark. We continue to believe, as stated in section III.G.5.c.(4) of the proposed rule, that as part of any adjustment for prior savings it is important to consider a measure of the sharing rate used in determining the shared savings payment the ACO earned in the applicable performance years under its prior agreement period(s). Using the actual average savings rate as the upward adjustment factor to the historical benchmark would not incorporate a measure of the sharing rate in computing the prior savings adjustment to the benchmark, and we believe that such an approach could contribute to overinflating benchmarks. If CMS were to return 100 percent of an ACO's per capita savings to its historical benchmark in subsequent agreement periods, ACOs would have minimal incentives to continue lowering spending after generating shared savings in a single agreement period. Additionally, the sharing rates vary within the Shared Savings Program's tracks/levels. Under the BASIC track, the maximum sharing rate is 40 percent under the one-sided model Levels A and B, and 50 percent under the two-sided model Levels C, D, and E (§ 425.605(d)). Under the ENHANCED track the maximum sharing rate is 75 percent (§ 425.610(d)). As we explained in the proposed rule (87 FR 46173), we believe it is most straightforward to apply a consistent scaling factor in calculating the prior savings adjustment and we believe that a 50 percent scaling factor is appropriate because it represents a middle ground between the maximum sharing rate of 75 percent under the ENHANCED track and the lower sharing rates available under the BASIC track.

Comment: Several commenters suggested that CMS modify the cap on the prior savings adjustment, which was proposed to be set at 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for Parts A and B services in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3. Commenters provided a variety of suggestions, including to risk adjust the 5 percent national FFS spending cap to make it a more accurate reflection of the complexity of an ACO's patient population. Many of these commenters also suggested that CMS should increase the cap by allowing ACOs to receive the greater of the 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries or 50 percent of the pro-rated average per capita savings net of any negative regional adjustments. Some of these same commenters preferred an alternative approach to capping the prior savings adjustment wherein the cap would be adjusted according to an ACO's spending relative to its region. One commenter that was particularly concerned that the value of the prior savings adjustment may be relatively lower (we assume the commenter means as a proportion of the ACO's own historical benchmark expenditures) for ACOs serving medically complex populations specifically suggested that CMS use one of the following approaches to adjust the cap on the prior savings adjustment: (1) risk adjust the national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries used to determine the cap on the prior savings adjustment; (2) allow ACOs with higher percentages of underserved, high-risk populations to receive the greater of a percentage of their prior average per capita savings or a percentage of national FFS expenditures for the assignable population; or (3) replace the proposed cap based on national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries with a percentage of an ACO's most recent per capita benchmark from the prior agreement period (BY3). Within each of these options, this commenter suggested using a sliding scale to allow ACOs with larger average final sharing rates in their previous agreement period to receive a larger cap on the prior savings adjustment to encourage ACOs to assume greater risk over time. The commenter suggested that these alternatives would not meaningfully increase costs for the Shared Savings Program and would “offset large adjustments to ACOs with higher than average benchmarks that would otherwise discourage these ACOs from continued participation in the program.” Although the precise meaning of this statement is unclear, we believe that the commenter may have been suggesting that these proposed changes would compensate for large negative regional adjustments received by ACOs with high risk or medically complex beneficiary populations that are higher spending than their regional service areas.

Response: We appreciate commenters' concerns that the cap on the prior savings adjustment at 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures could be disadvantageous to some ACOs, particularly those with a large proportion of high-risk patients. However, we decline to adopt their suggestions for modifying the cap on the prior savings adjustment to make it more generous to ACOs, or for a subset of ACOs including ACOs serving a high proportion of high risk or medically complex beneficiaries, either through risk adjustment or other methods. Based on CMS's additional modeling of the prior savings adjustment conducted with ACOs beginning an agreement period in PY 2020 and PY 2022, less than 5 percent of ACOs receiving the prior savings adjustment would be impacted by the cap on the prior savings adjustment. In PY 2020, among ACOs that would have benefited from the prior savings adjustment but that would also have seen the prior savings adjustment limited by the cap, the mean reduction would have been 2.1 percent of their total historical benchmark. In PY 2022 the equivalent figure would have been 0.61 percent. Further, given that few ACOs were subject to the cap in our modeling, our modeling does not conclusively suggest whether ACOs with a large proportion of high risk beneficiaries would be disproportionately impacted by the cap. Based on this analysis, we believe that the proposed cap on the prior savings adjustment adequately prevents against over inflating benchmarks and would not disproportionately impact ACOs with a high proportion of high risk beneficiaries. However, we do intend to monitor the application of the prior savings adjustment and may adjust the cap in future rulemaking if evidence emerges that ACOs with relatively large high risk or medically complex patient populations are disadvantaged by the capping methodology.

Additionally, we interpret the commenters' suggestion that CMS should increase the cap by allowing ACOs to receive the greater of 5 percent of the national per capita FFS expenditures in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries or 50 percent of the pro-rated average per capita savings net of any negative regional adjustments to imply that all ACOs would receive a prior savings adjustment of 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries. We decline to adopt this suggestion because doing so would result in a large prior savings adjustment for all ACOs regardless of their past performance. If commenters instead intended to imply that CMS should raise the cap on the prior savings adjustment to be the greater of 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures in BY3 and 50 percent of the pro-rated average per capita savings net of any negative regional adjustments, we decline to adopt this alternative for the same reasons we previously explained for declining to alter the cap on the prior savings adjustment, namely that our modeling of the proposed approach suggests that only a small percentage ACOs would have their prior savings adjustment capped and because this alternative approach may over inflate benchmarks.

We also decline to adopt the commenter's suggestion to modify the cap on the prior savings adjustment to further mitigate large negative regional adjustments received by ACOs because we believe the proposed approach already provides sufficient flexibility with respect to the use of the prior savings adjustment to offset a negative regional adjustment. Under the proposed approach, for ACOs with negative aggregate regional adjustments, the cap of 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3 would apply only when 50 percent of the sum of the pro-rated average per capita savings and the regional adjustment is not only positive but also exceeds 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures. As a result, because the prior savings adjustment could not only fully offset a negative aggregate regional adjustment but also yield a positive adjustment up to the 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures cap, ACOs with negative aggregate regional adjustments could receive a net benefit from the proposed policy significantly greater than 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures relative to the benchmark they would have received in the absence of the proposed policy.

We also decline to adopt the commenter's suggestion to tie the cap on the prior savings adjustment to an ACO's final sharing rate from the previous agreement period. We believe this approach could selectively ameliorate ratchet effects for a subset of ACOs while providing little benefit for other ACOs, depending on their track in their prior agreement period. Accordingly, we believe that this alternative approach, when compared to the proposed approach of applying the same cap on the prior savings adjustment for all ACOs regardless of their previous agreement period track(s), would less equitably addresses the dynamics we set out to address through our proposal, as described in section III.G.5.c.(2) of this final rule, including ensuring accurate and reasonable benchmarks and addressing the effect of an ACO's prior success in the Shared Savings Program on its benchmark.

Comment: Several commenters encouraged CMS to expand the prior savings adjustment to include savings achieved through past and future CMS ACO initiatives, such as the NGACO Model and the Global and Professional Direct Contracting Model, including the redesign of that model as the ACO REACH Model.

Response: We decline the commenters' suggestion because we do not believe it would be appropriate or feasible to incorporate savings generated in other shared savings models within a prior savings adjustment under the Shared Savings Program at this time. There are significant methodological differences across models that would make blending savings estimates across models logistically infeasible and could produce inequities between cohorts of ACO that did or did not participate in other models previously. Additionally, pursuing this suggestion would entail developing a methodology for how to account for such savings based on an ACO's participation in other CMS ACO initiatives, which was not contemplated within our proposed approach.

Comment: Several commenters suggested that because the prior savings adjustment as proposed would only apply to renewing ACOs and re-entering ACOs entering a new agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, CMS should make this methodology change available to all ACOs in existing agreement periods beginning in PY 2024. These commenters expressed concern that, in order to benefit from the adjustment for prior savings, ACOs within existing agreement periods would have to terminate their current agreements and enter into a new agreement period starting in 2024, causing undue administrative burden.

Response: We appreciate these commenters' concern that ACOs continuing in existing agreement periods with start dates prior to 2024 would not operate under a benchmark methodology that includes an adjustment for prior savings until they enter a new agreement period beginning on or after January 1, 2024. However, we do not believe it would be appropriate to institute the prior savings adjustment for such ACOs until they enter a new agreement period because doing so would disrupt the consistency of an ACO's benchmarking methodology within a single agreement period. These ACOs would be eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment for an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, upon renewing (including early renewing) to continue their participation in the Shared Savings Program or re-entering the Shared Savings Program after the termination or expiration of their prior participation agreement.

Additionally, a key aspect of applying the prior savings adjustment for future agreement periods is that an ACO's benchmark would be rebased upon the beginning of a new agreement period. We believe that making the prior savings adjustment available to ACOs without the requirement of beginning a new agreement period could create a selective gaming opportunity. ACOs could take advantage of the prior savings adjustment without receiving a rebased historical benchmark that incorporates the spending reductions from the performance years used to calculate the prior savings adjustment. Further, as we indicated in earlier rulemaking, while ACOs may early renew in order to opt into new Shared Savings Program methodologies, the accompanying requirement of receiving a rebased historical benchmark at the start of each new agreement period, among other factors, mitigates the concern that ACOs could selectively take advantage of new policies (83 FR 67906).

Comment: One commenter encouraged CMS to explore calculating the prior savings adjustment at the TIN-level as opposed to the ACO-level. While the commenter did not specify a methodology for calculating a TIN-level prior savings adjustment, the commenter suggested that a TIN-level adjustment would ensure that the prior savings adjustment accounts for changes in ACO participant lists between agreement periods and captures the full scope of savings generated by an ACO's participant TINs. This commenter noted that by not applying the previous savings adjustment at the TIN-level, ACO participants, and potentially any ACO that they join, could be negatively impacted by changes to ACO participant lists.

Response: At this time, we decline the commenter's suggestion to establish a TIN-level prior savings adjustment. This alternative goes beyond the scope of the proposed prior savings adjustment. Additionally, we have some concerns about a TIN-level prior savings adjustment. Our primary concern with instituting a TIN-level prior savings adjustment is that an ACO could receive benefits from prior savings generated by other ACOs that are unconnected to the ACO's actual prior performance. Such a methodology could reward ACOs for savings generated by another ACO if the ACO gains an ACO participant TIN that previously participated with another ACO. Such churn in ACO participant lists is allowable and anticipated under existing Shared Savings Program methodology. We note that under the proposal, for new ACOs that are identified as re-entering ACOs, we would calculate the prior savings adjustment based on the prior performance of the ACO in which 50 percent or more of the ACO participants previously participated. In this scenario an ACO would receive credit for savings generated by another ACO. However, we believe that the requirement that we would only consider the prior savings of the ACO in which 50 or more percent of an ACO's ACO participants previously participated makes it reasonable, in this circumstance, to utilize the prior savings generated by a different ACO to calculate an ACO's prior savings adjustment. Additionally, instituting a TIN-level prior savings adjustment would involve significant additional complexity that is outside the scope of the proposal.

Related to the proposal to utilize the prior savings of another ACO to calculate the prior savings adjustment for re-entering ACOs, we note that as proposed, we would only identify the ACO in which 50 or more percent of the ACO's ACO participants previously participated at the beginning of an ACO's agreement period, consistent with our regulation at § 425.20. We intend to monitor ACOs identified as re-entering ACOs to determine how ACO participant list changes that occur during performance years within an agreement period may change the composition of the ACO relative to the initial composition that established the ACO as a re-entering ACO. As we continue to monitor the effects of this policy, we may revisit the applicability of the prior savings adjustment for re-entering ACOs in future rulemaking to ensure that the prior savings adjustment is calculated appropriately for re-entering ACOs.

Comment: MedPAC supported the proposed prior savings adjustment because it would provide a strong incentive for ACOs to improve efficiencies in care delivery, particularly among ACOs that serve beneficiaries with higher spending than their regional averages. MedPAC stated that a prior savings adjustment is a reasonable policy for mitigating ratchet effects until CMS can phase in a fixed administrative growth rate with a regional efficiency discount.

However, MedPAC raised several concerns about implementing proposals designed to combat ratcheting effects—specifically the prior savings adjustment and the ACPT—alongside the regional adjustment. Most of these concerns were rooted in a belief that the existing regional adjustment is too generous to ACOs. MedPAC explained that the regional adjustment, which allows ACOs to receive higher benchmarks without demonstrating efficiency gains during their Shared Savings Program participation, has coincided with an elevated level of selective participation into the Shared Savings Program that has put it at risk of being a net cost to the Medicare program. MedPAC stated that the regional adjustment used under the existing benchmarking methodology creates selective participation pressures by benefiting low-spending providers/suppliers and disadvantaging high-spending providers/suppliers, and presented evidence that positive regional adjustments have contributed to ACOs receiving inflated benchmarks and substantial shared savings payments without decreasing costs relative to what spending levels would have been in the absence of the Shared Savings Program. MedPAC included recommendations for alternatives to the positive regional adjustment for consideration by CMS. These include higher shared savings rates, protection from shared losses up to an amount equivalent to the regional adjustment, and prospective trend factors that could be slightly higher relative to an ACO's regional spending.

Given their criticism that the regional adjustment has generated “illusory savings” in the Shared Savings Program, MedPAC urged CMS to use the prior savings adjustment as a means of phasing out the regional adjustment. MedPAC expressed a belief that while the prior savings adjustment is a reasonable policy for mitigating ratcheting effects, implementing both policies together would be duplicative. MedPAC also expressed concern that the prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment could interact in a way that would perpetuate a programmatic bias towards ACOs receiving a positive regional adjustment. In MedPAC's view, many ACOs would receive an inflated prior savings adjustment because the prior savings adjustment would be based on savings achieved using benchmarks already inflated by the regional adjustment. MedPAC's comments regarding interactions between the ACPT and the regional adjustment contain a similar concern. MedPAC asserted that without a downward adjustment to the positive regional adjustments currently received by the majority of ACOs, the ACPT would further subsidize these ACOs without generating real efficiency gains for the Medicare program.

Response: We appreciate the perspective that the regional adjustment has increased savings for certain ACOs, has coincided with increased selective participation in the Shared Savings Program, and could contribute to the over inflation of historical benchmarks if left in place alongside other policies designed to combat ratcheting like the prior savings adjustment and the ACPT. We decline to adopt MedPAC's specific proposed alternatives to the positive regional adjustment because they go beyond the scope of the policies proposed. With respect to the interaction between the prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment, the design of the proposed approach includes guardrails that we believe will be sufficient to prevent ACO historical benchmarks from becoming overly inflated and enabling ACOs to earn shared savings payments without decreasing spending. Specifically, ACOs could only receive the greater of the prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment under the proposed policy, we would apply a proration factor to help ensure that the prior savings adjustment does not exceed the amount of cumulative savings generated by the ACO during the performance years that constitute the benchmark years for its current agreement period due to growth in assigned beneficiaries, and the size of the final adjustment would be capped. With respect to interactions between the ACPT, the prior savings adjustment, and the regional adjustment more broadly, we note that each of these policies is designed to address different dynamics within the benchmark. However, we intend to monitor the collective impacts of these approaches on ACO benchmarks for evidence of over-inflation or negative impacts to the Trust Fund. We may address these issues in future rulemaking if necessary.

Comment: One commenter suggested that CMS provide additional modeling and/or analytical results on the impacts of the prior savings adjustment because the proposed calculations are complex. This commenter preferred removing an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from regional expenditures or expanding the regional service area to the more complicated prior savings adjustment.

Response: Since the issuance of the proposed rule we have conducted additional modeling of the impact of the prior savings adjustment that we believe clearly shows the potential for ACOs to benefit from the proposed policy. We refer readers to Table 69 and the related description of this modeling within this section of this final rule. We have provided detailed descriptions and examples in the proposed rule and this final rule on how the prior savings adjustment will be calculated, and we also anticipate updating the Shared Savings Program's publicly available specifications documents, programmatic resources and materials, and the aggregate reports provided to ACOs to include information about how we calculate and apply the prior savings adjustment. In section III.G.5.c.(6) of this final rule, we summarize and respond to comments on the alternative options we considered to address concerns about the effect of an ACO's assigned beneficiaries on regional FFS expenditures in establishing, adjusting, updating, and resetting the ACO's historical benchmark.

Comment: One commenter supported our proposed prior savings adjustment because they believe it would tend to set persistently higher benchmarks for ACOs that decreased spending during prior participation in the Shared Savings Program. In the commenter's view, the prior savings adjustment would increase the attractiveness of Shared Savings Program participation for such ACOs. However, the commenter expressed concern that, as proposed, the prior savings adjustment may phase out across agreement periods too quickly to combat long-run ratchet effects. The commenter pointed out that, due to the use of a scaling factor to calculate the prior savings adjustment, if an ACO generates savings during an agreement period, a progressively smaller share of those savings would be returned to the benchmark in each successive agreement period. The result, in the commenter's view, is that although the prior savings adjustment would mitigate selective participation concerns in the short-run, in the long-run some ACOs will once again begin to face benchmarks that are too low to allow them to participate, recreating similar ratchet effects that exist under the current benchmarking methodology. The commenter offered an alternative approach under which, in any agreement period that follows an agreement period during which the ACO received a prior savings adjustment, a portion of the earlier prior savings adjustment would be retained regardless of how the ACO performed relative to its benchmark during the agreement period in which it received the prior savings adjustment. This fraction of the ACO's earlier prior savings adjustment, plus any additional prior savings from the ACO's previous agreement period, subject to a discount factor, would constitute the prior savings adjustment for the ACO's new agreement period.

The commenter also urged CMS to consider additional modifications to the Shared Savings Program financial methodology that would encourage efficient ACOs to serve more patients and inefficient ACOs to either become more efficient or serve fewer patients. In particular, the commenter urged CMS to consider modifications that would increase the financial costs to providers and suppliers of opting out of the Shared Savings Program such as reducing the FFS payment rates for non-participating providers and suppliers (which the commenter acknowledges would require legislative action). In the commenter's view, introducing financial penalties for opting out of the Shared Savings Program would enable CMS to move towards an ideal historical benchmarking methodology that places ACOs on a level playing field and reduces reliance on incentives like the prior savings adjustment which increase benchmarks for high cost ACOs.

Response: We appreciate this commenter's support for the proposed prior savings adjustment and their comments on the potential for the effect of the prior savings adjustment to phase out over the course of multiple agreement periods. However, we believe it is appropriate for the prior savings adjustment to fade out over time if the ACO maintains steady spending levels over subsequent agreement periods in order to retain an incentive for ACOs to become more efficient over time. Additionally, ACOs will still be eligible for the positive regional adjustment if they maintain or increase their efficiency relative to their region. The commenter's suggestion that CMS increase the financial costs to providers and suppliers for opting out of participating in the Shared Savings Program, such as by reducing FFS payment rates for non-participating providers and suppliers, is outside the scope of the proposal and would, as the commenter notes, require legislative action.

Comment: One commenter supported our proposal to calculate the final adjustment to an ACO's benchmark as the higher of the positive aggregate regional adjustment and the prior savings adjustment but noted that the policy did not sufficiently account for the impact of an ACO's prior success on future benchmarks. This commenter offered several alternative benchmarking proposals that would involve significant alterations to the regional adjustment and the proposed prior savings adjustment which the commenter claims would “address the concerns of all new and renewing ACOs, regardless of regional efficiency.” Under this commenter's suggestions, benchmark options would be flexible. New ACOs and those that are less efficient than their regions would receive purely historical benchmarks until becoming more efficient than their regions, and would receive positive regional adjustments thereafter. ACOs in a second or subsequent agreement period would receive the higher of a purely regional benchmark, a benchmark with 50 percent of prior gross savings added back in, and a benchmark based solely on historical expenditures.

Response: We are unsure how to interpret the commenter's alternative benchmarking proposals. However, we note that they go beyond the scope of the proposed prior savings adjustment and the other modifications we proposed to the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule. Additionally, relating to the portion of the commenter's recommendations that we understand to recommend more generous alternatives, we believe that the commenter's suggested approach could result in overly generous benchmarks and additional costs to the Shared Savings Program.

After consideration of the public comments, we are finalizing as proposed the methodology for instituting a prior savings adjustment. This new policy will be specified in a new provision at § 425.658 applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. This provision also specifies the approach to determining an ACO's eligibility for the prior savings adjustment.

We received no comments directly addressing the proposed proration factor component of the prior savings adjustment calculation, as described in this section of this final rule. We are finalizing without modification our proposal to specify at § 425.658(b)(3)(ii) the application of a proration factor in the calculation of the prior savings adjustment to account for any upward growth in the ACO's assigned population in the benchmark years of the current agreement period calculated using the ACO's certified ACO participant list and assignment methodology for the current performance year as compared to the size of the assigned population when the ACO was reconciled for the corresponding performance years in its prior agreement period(s). We are also specifying at § 425.652(a)(9) that for the second and each subsequent performance year during the term of the ACO's agreement period, we will redetermine the proration factor used in calculating the prior savings adjustment under § 425.658 to account for any changes in the ACO's assigned beneficiary population in the benchmark years due to the addition and removal of ACO participants or ACO providers/suppliers in accordance with § 425.118(b), a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection under § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), or changes to the beneficiary assignment methodology. We clarify, more generally, that we anticipate applying the provisions in § 425.652(a)(9) in a manner that is consistent with how we have previously applied the existing provision at § 425.601(a)(9), which provides for the redetermination of certain benchmark calculations for the second and each subsequent performance year during the term of the ACO's agreement period to account for changes in the ACO's assigned beneficiary population in the benchmark years. Consistent with this approach, we would only redetermine the proration factor used in the prior savings adjustment calculation, as necessary, to account for the addition and removal of ACO participants or ACO providers/suppliers in accordance with § 425.118(b), a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection under § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), or changes to the beneficiary assignment methodology. If none of these circumstances apply for the second or subsequent performance year, we would not redetermine the proration factor.

Further, we are finalizing in § 425.652(a)(8) the approach for comparing the pro-rated average prior savings amount calculated under § 425.658 with the ACO's regional adjustment amount described in the new provision at § 425.656(c), to determine the applicability of the prior savings adjustment, the regional adjustment, or a combination of these two adjustments.

(5) Reducing the Impact of the Negative Regional Adjustment

(a) Background

In earlier rulemaking we have discussed our use of the Secretary's discretion under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act to adjust the historical benchmark by “such other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate” in order to adjust ACO historical benchmarks to reflect FFS expenditures in the ACO's regional service area (81 FR 37962). We initially established a regional adjustment in a benchmark rebasing methodology that applied to ACOs entering a second agreement period beginning on January 1, 2017, January 1, 2018, or January 1, 2019 (§ 425.603(c) through (g)), before modifying our policy to apply this adjustment program wide beginning with agreement periods starting on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years (§ 425.601(a)(8)).

In accordance with § 425.601(a)(8), for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, we adjust historical benchmark expenditures by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries) by a percentage of the difference between the average per capita expenditure amount for the ACO's regional service area and the average per capita amount of the ACO's historical benchmark (referred to herein as the “regional adjustment”). As we explained in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, the percentage that is applied in calculating the regional adjustment is currently determined in accordance with § 425.601(f) and depends on whether the ACO has lower or higher spending compared to the ACO's regional service area and the agreement period for which the ACO is subject to the regional adjustment, according to the phase-in schedule of the applicable weights. For an ACO that has lower spending compared to its regional service area, the weight applied to the regional adjustment is 35 percent for the first agreement period in which the ACO is subject to a regional adjustment and 50 percent in the ACO's second and subsequent agreement periods subject to a regional adjustment. For an ACO that has higher spending compared to its regional service area, the weight is 15 percent for the first agreement period in which the ACO is subject to a regional adjustment, increasing to 25 percent, 35 percent, and 50 percent, for the second, third, and fourth and subsequent agreement periods that an ACO is subject to a regional adjustment, respectively.

As discussed in the proposed rule, we cap the per capita dollar amount of the regional adjustment for each Medicare enrollment type at a dollar amount equal to positive or negative 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program in benchmark year (BY) 3 for assignable beneficiaries (as defined in § 425.20) in that Medicare enrollment type identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3 (§ 425.601(a)(8)(ii)(C)) (referred to herein as positive or negative 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries, and as the “symmetrical cap;” terms which we consider to be synonymous).

Table 70 illustrates how the regional adjustment is calculated under the current policy. For this hypothetical ACO, assumed to be in its first agreement period subject to a regional adjustment, the ACO has lower spending than its regional service area for the ESRD and aged/dual eligible populations (that is, the difference between the ACO's average per capita regional expenditures and the ACO's average per capita historical benchmark expenditures is positive) and higher spending for its disabled and aged/non-dual eligible populations (that is, the difference between the ACO's average per capita regional expenditures and the ACO's average per capita historical benchmark expenditures is negative). The weighted average difference between the region and the ACO, which is used to calculate the ACO's regional adjustment, is determined first by multiplying the difference between average per capita FFS expenditures for the ACO's regional service area and the ACO's average per capita historical benchmark expenditures for each Medicare enrollment type by its respective enrollment type proportion and then summing across the four enrollment types. In this example, because the weighted average is negative (−$495), the ACO is considered to have higher (overall) spending than its regional service area. Thus, the weight used to calculate the regional adjustment for this ACO based on the schedule of weights described in § 425.601(f) is 15 percent. This regional adjustment percentage weight is applied to the difference between the ACO's average per capita regional expenditures and the ACO's average per capita historical benchmark expenditures for each enrollment type (whether positive or negative) to obtain the uncapped regional adjustment for each enrollment type. When comparing these uncapped values to the symmetrical cap of 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries, only the ACO's positive ESRD adjustment is constrained by the cap. The ultimate impact of the symmetrical cap is to increase the ACO's overall weighted average regional adjustment from −$74 to −$77.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we explained that the current schedule of weights described in § 425.601(f)) and the positive or negative 5 percent cap on the regional adjustment described in § 425.601(a)(8)(ii)(C)) were finalized in the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68017 through 68024). These policies were designed to address a dynamic where the regional adjustment could provide overly inflated benchmarks for ACOs that are relatively low spending compared to their region, while ACOs with higher spending compared to their region may find little value in remaining in the program when faced with a significantly reduced benchmark. We also explained our belief that these policies would make the benchmark more achievable for ACOs that care for medically complex patients and are high spending compared to their region, thereby encouraging their continued participation, while at the same time preventing windfall shared savings payments for ACOs that have relatively low spending levels relative to their region (83 FR 67822).

As discussed in the section entitled “Overview of Considerations for Modification to the Benchmarking Methodology” (section III.G.5.c.(2) of this final rule), we now believe that the existing negative 5 percent cap may not limit the negative regional adjustment enough to provide sufficient incentive for participation among ACOs serving high cost, medically complex populations. In the proposed rule, we noted that we have concerns that setting the cap on negative regional adjustments at negative 5 percent may limit opportunities for these beneficiaries, who arguably have the greatest need to receive coordinated care, as well as potential savings for the Trust Funds. Therefore, we noted that we believe it is important to further reduce the impact of negative regional adjustments, particularly for ACOs caring for high cost populations, including high-risk patients and beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, beyond what is allowed under the current regulation at § 425.601(a)(8)(ii)(C).

(b) Revisions

We proposed to institute two policy changes designed to limit the impact of negative regional adjustments on ACO historical benchmarks and further incentivize program participation among ACOs serving high cost beneficiaries:

• Reduce the cap on negative regional adjustments from negative 5 percent of national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries to negative 1.5 percent.

• After the cap is applied to the regional adjustment, gradually decrease the negative regional adjustment amount as an ACO's proportion of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries increases or its weighted average prospective HCC risk score increases.

The choice of a negative 1.5 percent cap was informed by CMS' experience with use of a 2 percent cap on negative regional expenditure adjustments under the Global and Professional Direct Contracting Model (to be redesigned and renamed as the ACO Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (REACH) Model beginning January 1, 2023), as well as considerations related to the potential longer-term vision for use of an administratively set benchmark under which a negative discount for less efficient ACOs could be approximately 1.6 percent over the ACO's agreement period as described in the comment solicitation on Incorporating an Administrative Benchmarking Approach into the Shared Savings Program in section III.G.7. of the proposed rule.

Under this proposal, we would continue to apply a cap equal to positive 5 percent of national per capita expenditures for assignable beneficiaries to positive regional adjustments for each enrollment type. Table 71 illustrates how the cap would be applied asymmetrically to positive and negative regional adjustments under this proposal.

The hypothetical ACO in this example had a mix of positive and negative regional adjustments across the four enrollment types. The ACO's uncapped ESRD adjustment is positive and above the positive 5 percent cap. Therefore, it falls from $4,450 to $4,299 when the cap is applied. The ACO's uncapped aged/non-dual eligible adjustment is outside the new negative 1.5 percent cap and thus falls from −$259 to −$158 when the cap is applied. The ACO's disabled and aged/dual eligible adjustments are both under the applicable caps and are unaffected. The ACO's overall weighted average regional adjustment (calculated by multiplying the adjustment for each enrollment type by the corresponding enrollment type proportion and then summing across the four enrollment types) falls from −$74 to −$7 when the cap is applied. Note that under the current policy with a symmetrical cap equal to 5 percent of national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services for assignable beneficiaries, only the ACO's ESRD adjustment would be constrained. The ACO's aged/non-dual eligible adjustment would remain at −$259 and the ACO's overall adjustment would actually become more negative (−$77) after capping (as shown in Table 71).

For negative regional adjustments, we also proposed to apply an offset factor based on the following: [A] the ACO's overall proportion of BY3 assigned beneficiaries that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid (including dually eligible ESRD, disabled, and aged beneficiaries) 341 and [B] the ACO's weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 taken across the four Medicare enrollment types. Before taking this weighted average, the risk score for each enrollment type would first be renormalized by dividing by the national mean risk score for the assignable FFS population for that enrollment type identified for the calendar year corresponding to BY3. Specifically, the offset factor would be calculated as:

341 In computing this proportion, we would use for each beneficiary the fraction of the year (referred to as person years) in which they were eligible for the aged/dual eligible enrollment type or for which they were eligible for the ESRD or disabled enrollment type and dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

Offset factor = [A] + ([B]−1)

This offset factor would be applied to negative regional adjustments after the negative 1.5 percent cap is applied. The offset factor would be subject to a minimum of zero and a maximum of one. We would apply the offset factor by subtracting its value from 1 and multiplying this difference by the negative regional adjustment for each Medicare enrollment type, calculated as:

Final regional adjustment = Negative regional adjustment × (1−Offset factor)

The higher an ACO's proportion of dually eligible beneficiaries or the higher its risk score, the larger the offset factor would be and the larger the reduction to the overall negative regional adjustment. If the offset factor is equal to the maximum value of one, the ACO would not receive a negative regional adjustment (that is, the negative weighted average regional adjustment would be fully offset). If the offset factor is equal to the minimum value of zero, the ACO would receive no benefit from the offset factor.

To illustrate how the offset would be calculated and applied, assume that the hypothetical ACO from Table 72 had a proportion of dually eligible beneficiaries of 0.220 and a weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 of 1.389. The offset factor for this ACO would be calculated as:

Offset factor = 0.220 + (1.389−1) = 0.609

This factor would be applied as illustrated in Table 72 by multiplying the negative regional adjustment for each applicable Medicare enrollment type by 1 minus the offset factor or 0.391.

Here, the offset factor would be applied to the regional adjustments for the disabled and aged/non-dual eligible populations, as both are negative, but not to the regional adjustments for the ESRD and aged/dual eligible populations, which are both positive. Taking the weighted average across the enrollment types following application of the offset factor shows that the ACO's overall weighted regional adjustment goes from −$7 before the offset to $78 after the offset, a positive per capita impact of $85.

In the proposed rule, we noted that it would be possible for an ACO to benefit from one aspect of the proposed policy, but not the other. For example, ACOs that have negative regional adjustments that are below the negative 1.5 percent cap will not be affected by the proposed reduction to the cap but could still benefit from the proposed offset factor. Alternatively, an ACO whose negative adjustment is reduced by the negative 1.5 percent cap would receive no further benefit from the offset factor if it has a low proportion of dually eligible beneficiaries or a low risk score such that the offset factor equals 1.

We simulated the combined impact of the policy proposals using data from PY 2020 historical benchmarks for ACOs in agreement periods starting on or after July 1, 2019. The results of this simulation are summarized in Table 73.

Under the policy proposals, the negative regional adjustment for almost every ACO that had a negative regional adjustment in PY 2020 under current policy (40 out of 43 ACOs) would have been reduced (or eliminated), with an average per capita impact of approximately $114. ACOs with higher weighted average BY3 prospective HCC risk scores and higher proportions of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries had overall greater reductions in their negative regional adjustments. Four ACOs in the simulation had an offset factor of 1, meaning they received a full offset to their negative regional adjustments. An additional 170 ACOs that had a positive weighted average regional adjustment under the current policy but that had at least one enrollment type with a negative regional adjustment would also have benefitted from the combined policy. The average per capita impact among these ACOs was smaller at around $5. We believe that the impacts observed in our simulation are likely to grow larger as more ACOs progress further in the program and are subject to higher weights in the calculation of the regional adjustment, and as more ACOs that serve high cost and medically complex populations join the program.

We considered whether to make the changes applicable only to ACOs that would have had a negative weighted average regional adjustment under the current policy (that is, ACOs for which the regional adjustment has an overall negative impact on the per capita historical benchmark). However, we explained our belief that applying the lower cap and the offset factor at the enrollment type level would be more straightforward and would have the opportunity to benefit ACOs that may be serving high risk populations in at least one, but not all Medicare enrollment types.

We sought comment on the proposed changes to the calculation of the regional adjustment for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. The proposed changes would be reflected in a proposed new provision at § 425.656. We also proposed to specify in paragraph (a)(8) of the proposed new provision at § 425.652, also applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, the approach for comparing the pro-rated average prior savings amount (described in proposed § 425.658(b)(3)(ii)) with the ACO's regional adjustment amount (described in proposed § 425.656(c)), to determine the applicability of the prior savings adjustment, the regional adjustment, or a combination of these two adjustments.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on our proposals to reduce the impact of the negative regional adjustment and our responses:

Comment: Many commenters supported the proposal to: (1) reduce the cap on negative regional adjustments from negative 5 percent of national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries to negative 1.5 percent, and (2) after the cap is applied to the regional adjustment, gradually decrease the negative regional adjustment amount as an ACO's proportion of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries increases or its weighted average prospective HCC risk score increases.

Many commenters explained their support for the proposal, noting it will incentivize certain ACOs to join the program, such as those that are higher spending or care for underserved, complex, dually eligible, or high-cost beneficiaries. Several commenters supported the proposal stating that it will further incentivize higher spending ACOs to join the program, as well as increase participation from providers and suppliers who care for underserved and complex populations, which they stated addresses existing equity concerns. Several commenters noted that the policy will incentivize participation of ACOs that serve high-cost beneficiaries. One commenter agreed with CMS' concern that ACOs may be higher cost relative to their regions as a result of caring for the highest needs populations rather than being inefficient, and that the current negative regional adjustment policy impacts ACOs serving medically-complex, high-cost populations by creating barriers for existing ACOs to continue their participation in the Shared Savings Program, and for non-participating Medicare providers/suppliers caring for similar populations to join the Shared Savings Program. Another commenter stated that they support CMS' effort to “tailor” adjustments based on the specific population served by an ACO, such as through the population's average risk score or proportion of dually eligible beneficiaries, and recommended that CMS utilize the methodology which best advantages ACOs serving those acute, complex, and/or vulnerable populations.

A few commenters indicated that they believe the proposed modifications to limit the impact of the negative regional adjustment will help their ACO(s) specifically, stating they serve high-cost or medically complex populations. One commenter noted that their benchmark was “penalized” in their initial agreement period because they serve medically complex patients which resulted in their ACO having higher spending relative to its region. The commenter stated and that the proposed policy would help to mitigate this effect.

One commenter, who was supportive of the proposed policy, explained how they believe the current policy disincentivizes higher cost ACOs from joining the Shared Savings Program. The commenter noted that under the current benchmarking methodology CMS calculates an ACO's historical spending and then makes an adjustment based on the spending in the ACO's region. For ACOs that have spending that is higher than their region, the regional adjustment reduces their benchmark below their historical spending level, which the commenter states makes it more difficult for the ACO to achieve shared savings. As a result, the commenter noted ACOs with higher spending relative to their region are less likely to join the Shared Savings Program. The commenter added that more high spending ACOs exited the program than low spending ACOs when the regional adjustment was initially introduced. The commenter noted that current policy has led to selection bias against high spending ACOs, which may result in missed opportunities for generating savings to Medicare and constraining overall spending because these ACOs have the “greatest potential” for savings.

A few commenters cited their findings that the proposed policy would positively benefit 11 percent of currently participating ACOs. Another commenter cited CMS's estimate that the policy would benefit nearly all ACOs. One commenter stated their support for reducing the cap on negative regional adjustments to 1.5 percent, but noted that there is an argument that completely removing the negative adjustment would help maximize growth. The commenter did not indicate the type of growth they were referring to. However, the commenter noted that growth is not the only consideration and so agreed that the 1.5 percent cap balances growth with other considerations. Another supportive commenter recommended that CMS monitor the effects of the proposed policy on ACOs, especially ACOs that care for high cost or medically complex patients.

Response: We agree with commenters that the proposed policy would incentivize certain ACOs either to continue their participation in or to join the Shared Savings Program, and we are finalizing the proposal to modify the calculation of the negative regional adjustment with a modification to correct the description of the calculation.

For the reasons we provided in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, and as reflected in commenters' support for the proposed approach, we continue to believe reducing the impact of the negative regional adjustment will facilitate participation of ACOs in the Shared Savings Program, in particular ACOs with spending above their regional benchmark and those serving medically complex, high cost populations. Further, we have continued to evaluate our proposal since issuance of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, including performing additional modeling with benchmark data for ACOs with an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2022. This additional modeling yielded similar results to the PY 2020 modeling discussed earlier in this section with results presented in Table 73.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46161 and 46180), we noted that we had concerns that setting the cap on negative regional adjustments at negative 5 percent may limit opportunities for high cost, medically complex beneficiaries, who arguably have the greatest need to receive coordinated care, as well as potential savings for the Trust Funds. For example, in PYs 2017 through 2019, just over 80 percent of ACOs subject to a regional adjustment received a positive adjustment, indicating their spending was lower than spending in their regional service area. More recently, the share of ACOs receiving a positive regional adjustment is closer to 90 percent. This pattern also holds true in our analysis of PY 2022 historical benchmarks, with 87 percent of ACOs starting an agreement period on January 1, 2022 receiving a positive regional adjustment. This pattern suggests selective participation behavior, where ACOs that have already achieved efficiency or that are serving beneficiaries with lower health risks are more likely to participate in the Shared Savings Program. Providers and suppliers with the greatest opportunity to reduce spending (those that are inefficient and high spending relative to their region and that would receive a negative regional adjustment if they formed an ACO) are less likely to participate under the current methodology, limiting savings for the Medicare program. In the proposed rule, we also noted that additional analysis has suggested that ACOs receiving the largest negative regional adjustments tend to be those serving beneficiaries with high average risk scores and/or high proportions of beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. This pattern was also observed in our more recent analysis of PY 2022 historical benchmarks among ACOs starting an agreement period on January 1, 2022. These findings suggest that these ACOs may be higher cost relative to their regions as a result of caring for high needs populations rather than being inefficient, and that ACOs serving medically complex, high cost populations may have more difficulty participating in the Shared Savings Program. However, we also note that, similar to the findings discussed in section III.G.1.a of this final rule, we have observed that the highest earning ACOs are those ACOs providing care for a higher proportion of aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries and higher average risk scores than the lowest earning ACOs, further supporting the rationale for reducing the negative regional adjustment.

We believe the modifications to the calculation of the negative regional adjustment that we are finalizing in this final rule will generate higher benchmarks among ACOs with spending above their regional benchmark and those serving medically complex, high cost populations and will provide more achievable benchmarks to measure the performance of these ACOs. Additionally, because we decided not to limit the proposal only to those ACOs that have a negative weighted average regional adjustment, as discussed earlier in this section of the final rule, we believe this policy will also generate higher benchmarks for many ACOs with overall lower spending than their region, but that may have higher spending for one or more Medicare enrollment types. In section III.G.5.c.(5).(b) of the proposed rule, we discussed our simulation of the impact of the proposals to limit the impact of the negative regional adjustment using data from PY 2020 historical benchmarks for ACOs in agreement periods starting on or after July 1, 2019 (summarized in Table 73 of this final rule). Based on this simulation, a majority of ACOs would have seen increased historical benchmarks in PY 2020 under this proposed policy compared to current policy. This was also observed in more recent simulations using data from PY 2022 historical benchmarks among ACOs starting a new agreement period on January 1, 2022.

We need to provide a correction to the methodology for the calculation of the offset factor that was described in the proposed rule, and update the values related to the PY 2020 simulation summarized in Table 73 of this final rule to reflect this correction. In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we proposed to apply an offset factor based on the following: [A] the ACO's overall proportion of BY3 assigned beneficiaries that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid (including dually eligible ESRD, disabled, and aged beneficiaries) 342 and [B] the ACO's weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 taken across the four Medicare enrollment types (87 FR 46181). The offset factor was specified in the proposed new regulation at § 425.656(c)(4) as the sum of the proportion of the ACO's BY3 assigned beneficiaries that are dual eligible for Medicare and Medicaid and the difference between the ACO's weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 taken across the four Medicare enrollment types and 1. However, we need to correct this definition to address how the weight for each Medicare enrollment type would be calculated for purposes of determining the weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 taken across the four Medicare enrollment types. Accordingly, we are modifying the text of § 425.656(c)(4)(ii) in this final rule for consistency with this corrected approach. In calculating the weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3, the weight applied to the prospective HCC risk score for BY3 for each enrollment type would be equal to the product of the BY3 per capita expenditures for that enrollment type and the BY3 person years for that enrollment type. We note that the use of these weights to determine weighted average prospective HCC risk scores is similar to the proposal to use a weighted average risk ratio in setting the 3 percent cap on risk score growth as discussed in section III.G.5.e.(2) of this final rule. The correction we are making to the methodology used to calculate the offset factor is to ensure consistency between these two policies. We believe that weighting prospective HCC risk scores for BY3 using both BY3 per capita expenditures and BY3 person years is warranted to account for both the proportion of beneficiaries in each enrollment type, which is typically highest for the aged/non-dual eligible enrollment type, and per capita expenditures for each enrollment type, which tend to be highest in the ESRD and aged/dual eligible Medicare enrollment types. Additionally, we are modifying the text of § 425.656(c)(4)(i) in this final rule to say “dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid” instead of “dual eligible for Medicare and Medicaid” for consistency of terminology used in this final rule and elsewhere in the regulations. This is not a substantive modification to the proposals included in the proposed rule.

342 We note that in simulations of this policy proposal, when calculating “[A] the ACO's overall proportion of BY3 assigned beneficiaries that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid (including dually eligible ESRD, disabled, and aged beneficiaries)”, we used, for each beneficiary, the fraction of the year (referred to as person years) in which they were eligible for the aged/dual eligible enrollment type or for which they were eligible for the ESRD or disabled enrollment type and dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. This fraction of the year included months associated with episodes of care for the treatment of COVID-19. In operationalizing this proposal when finalized, this fraction would not include months associated with episodes of care for the treatment of COVID-19 (refer to § 425.611).

In the simulation results presented in Table 62 of the proposed rule (87 FR 46182), and restated in Table 73 of this final rule, we calculated a weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 where the weight applied to the prospective HCC risk score for BY3 for each enrollment type was equal only to the BY3 person years for that enrollment type, instead of the product of BY3 per capita expenditures for that enrollment type and the BY3 person years for that enrollment type. For this final rule, we have rerun this simulation to recalculate the weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 across the four Medicare enrollment types after weighting each enrollment type by the product of BY3 per capita expenditures for that enrollment type and the BY3 person years for that enrollment type. The updated results are reported in Table 74 of this final rule. The numbers of ACOs remain the same in the table; however, there are very small changes in dollar amounts provided in the “Per Capita Impact among Impacted ACOs” section of the table (all less than a dollar). The overall impact of this change to the methodology used to determine the offset factor was relatively small for all ACOs in the simulation, and led to changes in the impact of the simulation on the historical benchmark in both positive and negative directions (average change −$0.07, minimum −$6.13, and maximum $3.48).

In addition, since the issuance of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we have simulated the impact of the proposed modifications to the negative regional adjustment using data from PY 2022 historical benchmarks among ACOs starting a new agreement period on January 1, 2022, and using the corrected weights to determine the weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3. Results of this simulation are provided in Table 75.

In these PY 2022 simulation results (Table 75), the negative regional adjustment for almost every ACO that had a negative regional adjustment under current policy (26 out of 27 ACOs) would have been reduced (or eliminated). This is very similar to the PY 2020 simulation results (Table 74).

In the PY 2022 simulation, similar to the PY 2020 simulation, ACOs with higher weighted average BY3 prospective HCC risk scores and higher proportions of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries had overall greater reductions in their negative regional adjustments. These results also show that in both our PY 2020 and PY 2022 simulations, these policies generated higher benchmarks than the current policy for a majority of ACOs, whether or not they had higher spending than their region. However, as shown in the PY 2022 simulations, among ACOs with a positive weighted average regional adjustment, the average impact on benchmarks was only around $3, or about 1 percent of the average positive regional adjustment of about $268. In comparison, among ACOs with a negative weighted average regional adjustment, the average impact on benchmarks was around $48, or about 52 percent of the average negative regional adjustment of about −$92. As discussed elsewhere in this final rule, we decided not to limit the proposal only to those ACOs that have a negative weighted average regional adjustment in order to provide the opportunity to benefit ACOs that may be serving high risk populations in at least one, but not all Medicare enrollment types. However, we note that those ACOs with a positive weighted average regional adjustment would likely receive only a minor benefit from this policy based on the aforementioned simulation results.

Comment: One commenter urged CMS to allow ACOs that are in the middle of an agreement period on January 1, 2024, the flexibility to opt into the proposed negative regional adjustment policy without having to early renew, a process which the commenter described as being onerous. Another commenter also asked CMS to expand the negative regional adjustment policy to apply to ACOs currently participating in the Shared Savings Program.

Response: We decline the commenters' suggestion and are maintaining our proposal that ACOs would be subject to the changes we are finalizing to the negative regional adjustment on an agreement period basis. The modified approach we are finalizing to the calculation of the negative regional adjustment will apply to ACOs entering a new agreement period beginning on or after January 1, 2024. Elsewhere in section III.G.5 of this final rule, we explain our concerns regarding applying benchmarking changes to ACOs within an agreement period in responding to similar suggestions. Among other reasons, such an approach would introduce considerable operational complexity into the program's benchmarking methodology, particularly as the modified approach to calculation of the negative regional adjustment is one of a package of changes we are finalizing to the benchmarking methodology to be applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

We recognize that currently participating ACOs that entered an agreement period prior to January 1, 2024, may wish to pursue the option to early renew for a new agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, by terminating their current agreement and immediately entering a new agreement period, so that they would have the opportunity to participate under the revised benchmarking methodology. (Refer to paragraph (2) of the definition of “renewing ACO” in § 425.20, and the application procedures set forth in § 425.224.) We note that early renewal, like renewing upon completion of an agreement period, will result in rebasing of the ACO's historical benchmark, and will affect the ACO's eligibility for certain participation options (refer to section III.G.2. of this final rule), as well as the agreement period the ACO is entering for purposes of applying program requirements that phase-in over multiple agreement periods (refer to § 425.600(f)).

Comment: Many commenters supportive of the proposed policy had suggestions for additional policy changes that went beyond the scope of modifications we proposed to the regional adjustment methodology. One commenter suggested that high-cost ACOs may see the negative regional adjustment proposal as making the Shared Savings Program more attractive, but these ACOs may still not participate if regional trends are not accurately reflected in historical benchmark update factors.

Several commenters recommended that CMS further lower the negative regional adjustment cap based on the proportion of an ACO's population that is assigned based on primary care services furnished by specialists (Step 2 of the assignment methodology 343 ). The commenters explained that even after accounting for their higher risk scores, beneficiaries assigned through specialists have higher costs than those who are assigned based on services furnished by primary care providers (Step 1 of the assignment methodology 344 ) in the same given region.

343 Refer to § 425.402(b)(4).

344 Refer to § 425.402(b)(3).

Another commenter requested that CMS move ACOs with lower spending than their region to fully regional benchmarks over time (for example, by their second agreement period). The commenter also stated that CMS should allow ACOs with higher spending than their region to “remain in historical benchmarks” until they become efficient relative to their regions, then phase in the regional adjustment. The commenter noted that this additional modification would serve CMS' goal of encouraging increased participation in the program.

Another commenter requested that CMS consider two additional modifications to the regional adjustment policy: (1) extend the scope of the policy to apply a similar offset factor for positive regional adjustments; and (2) account for changes in an ACO's proportion of beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid between its BY3 and the performance year when updating the ACO's benchmark to reflect changes in the cost of care for assigned beneficiaries with “social needs,” similar to what is done in risk adjustment to account for changes in severity and case mix between BY3 and the performance year.

MedPAC noted concern that risk adjustment may not be adequately accounting for an ACO's regional efficiency. They explained that regional adjustments to benchmarks rely heavily on the accuracy of risk adjustment and presented evidence that “discrepancies” in the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model may penalize ACOs that disproportionately serve high-needs populations. They added that ACOs can create favorable bias in regional adjustments by being selective about identifying physician practices that serve assignable beneficiaries with low risk-adjusted spending. They provided (in response to our proposals for adjusting benchmarks to account for an ACO's prior savings and reducing negative regional adjustments) their recommendations for phasing out the regional adjustment to an ACO's benchmark expenditures.

Response: At this time, we decline the commenters' suggestions as summarized in the comment summary above. These suggestions go beyond the scope of the modifications we proposed to the program's regional adjustment methodology. In regards to the commenters' concern that high-cost ACOs may still not participate in the program if they believe regional trends are not accurately reflected in historical benchmark update factors, we note that we believe that incorporating a prospective, external factor that is risk adjusted in the growth rates used to update the historical benchmark (see section III.G.5.c.(3) of this final rule) will help to mitigate this concern by decreasing the weight placed on the two-way blend of national and regional growth rates when updating an ACO's historical benchmark for each performance year in the ACO's agreement period. In regards to the commenters' concerns that regional adjustments to benchmarks (that rely on the accuracy of risk adjustment) may penalize ACOs that disproportionately serve high-needs populations, we believe the proposal to reduce the cap on negative regional adjustments from negative 5 percent to negative 1.5 percent, and then gradually decrease the negative regional adjustment amount as an ACO's proportion of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries increases or its weighted average prospective HCC risk score increases, will address this concern.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing our proposal to make changes to the calculation of the regional adjustment for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, with a modification to correct an error in the description of the methodology in the proposed rule and a non-substantive modification for consistency of terminology, both of which were discussed earlier in this section of this final rule. Under this final policy, we will apply a cap on the negative regional adjustment at negative 1.5 percent of national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries, and after the cap is applied to the regional adjustment, gradually decrease the negative regional adjustment amount as an ACO's proportion of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries increases or its weighted average prospective HCC risk score increases. We are also finalizing our proposal to specify the provisions related to the calculation of the regional adjustment to the benchmark in a new regulation at § 425.656. However, we are revising § 425.656(c)(4)(ii) to specify that when calculating the weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 across the four Medicare enrollment type, the weight applied to the prospective HCC risk score for BY3 for each enrollment type is equal to the product of the BY3 per capita expenditures for that enrollment type and the BY3 person years for that enrollment type.

We are also finalizing without modification our proposal to specify in paragraph (a)(8) of § 425.652, also applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, the approach for comparing the pro-rated positive average prior savings amount (described in § 425.658(b)(3)(ii), and as discussed in section III.G.5.c.(4) of this final rule) with the ACO's regional adjustment amount (described in § 425.656(c)), to determine the applicability of a prior savings adjustment, the regional adjustment, or a combination of these two adjustments.

(6) Alternative Options for Addressing Concerns About the Effect of an ACO's Assigned Beneficiaries on Regional FFS Expenditures in Establishing, Adjusting, Updating, and Resetting the ACO's Historical Benchmark

ACOs and other interested parties have expressed concerns with CMS' approach to determining regional FFS expenditures using a population of assignable beneficiaries that includes an ACO's assigned beneficiaries including, with respect to the impact on the calculation of the regional adjustment and the blended national-regional growth rate used to trend and update the ACO's historical benchmark, suggesting this policy results in relatively lower benchmarks for ACOs, particularly ACOs with high market penetration in their regional service area, which may tend to be ACOs located in rural areas. In the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39291 through 39294), we sought comment on a number of potential approaches to addressing these concerns, as well as any unintended consequences that may result from removing an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from regional calculations. We summarized comments received in the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65296 through 65302). In sections III.G.5.c.(3) through (5) of the proposed rule (87 FR 46158 through 46183), we proposed a package of three provisions: incorporating a prospective, external factor in the growth rates used in updating the benchmark; adjusting rebased benchmarks to account for an ACO's prior savings; and reducing the impact of negative regional adjustments on ACO benchmarks. We designed this package of proposed provisions to, among other things, address concerns associated with including an ACO's own beneficiaries in its regional FFS expenditures. For example, the proposed inclusion of the ACPT in the growth rates used to update the benchmark based on a three-way blend would reduce the impact of including an ACO's assigned beneficiaries in the regional component of the blend. Under the proposal to use the higher of a prior savings adjustment, a positive regional adjustment, or a combination of both, the proposed prior savings adjustment could increase the historical benchmark for an ACO whose regional adjustment could have been decreased by the inclusion of its own assigned beneficiaries in the regional expenditure calculation.

As discussed in the proposed rule (87 FR 46183 through 46186), we also considered alternative options to this package of three proposals that would more directly reduce the effect of the ACO's own beneficiaries on its regional FFS expenditures: (1) removing an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the assignable beneficiary population used in regional expenditure calculations; and (2) expanding the definition of the ACO's regional service area to use a larger geographic area to determine regional FFS expenditures. We noted that these related approaches were among the policies we discussed and on which we sought comment in the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule. We also noted that we considered whether to use a combination of these two alternative approaches under which we would expand the ACO's regional service area in combination with removing an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the assignable beneficiary population used in calculating regional FFS expenditures. In evaluating these alternative approaches, we considered the comments we received in response to that comment solicitation (summarized in the CY 2022 PFS final rule) and considered the extent to which each alternative would address three core concerns (or dynamics) previously described in section III.G.5.c.(2) of the proposed rule (87 FR 46160) and summarized here:

• Mitigating the ratchet effect to ensure ACOs' rebased benchmarks remain accurate and serve as a reasonable baseline.

• Reducing a single ACO's or multiple ACOs' collective impacts on an ACO's regional expenditures, which are used to calculate the regional adjustment and the regional portion of the trend and update factors.

• Ensuring the benchmarking methodology results in benchmarks of sufficient value to encourage program entry and continued participation by ACOs, ACO participants, and ACO providers/suppliers serving medically-complex, high-cost populations.

We also noted that we considered the extent to which the alternatives could lead to other unintended consequences including introducing excessive benchmark volatility or creating incentives for market consolidation. We noted some of these alternatives may require use of our authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to implement alternative benchmarking methodologies that diverge from the requirements of section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act, including alternative approaches to updating the historical benchmark. We explained that in order to use our authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act, we must determine that the alternative payment methodology will improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries, without resulting in additional program expenditures. We noted that as of the time the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule was issued, we had not performed an analysis of the extent to which the alternative approaches would meet the requirements of section 1899(i)(3) of the Act, when use of this authority would be necessary for implementing such approaches within the Shared Savings Program's financial methodology.

In the proposed rule, we described the alternative options that we considered in more detail, as well as our assessment of the ability of each alternative to address the three core concerns we articulated and the other factors considered. We sought comment on these alternative options noting that interested parties would have the opportunity to consider their merits relative to the package of policies we proposed in sections III.G.5.c.(3) through (5) of the proposed rule (87 FR 46158 through 46183). We also sought comment on certain operational factors that we would need to address with greater specificity if we were to finalize any of the alternatives. We noted that we would consider the comments received on these alternative options along with the comments on the proposed package of policies in the development of our final policy, and that we might consider adopting one or both of the alternatives in lieu of the package of policies we proposed in section III.G.5.c.(3) through (5) of the proposed rule.

Alternative 1: Removing an ACO's Assigned Beneficiaries From the Assignable Beneficiary Population Used in Regional Expenditure Calculations

Under the first alternative considered, which aligns with suggestions made by some ACOs and other interested parties, we would exclude an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the population of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area used to determine the regional FFS expenditures used in all benchmarking calculations including trending and updating the benchmark and calculating the regional adjustment. We noted in the proposed rule (87 FR 46184) that if we were to adopt this first alternative to remove the ACO's own assigned beneficiaries but not also adopt the alternative to expand the ACO's regional service area under a combined approach, the ACO's regional service area would remain as all counties where one or more beneficiaries assigned to the ACO reside (as defined under § 425.20). If we were to adopt a combined alternative, we would consider a modified definition of the ACO's regional service area. To remove an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the regional expenditure calculation, we would use the mathematical approach described in the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39292 and 39293), which relies on the premise that per capita risk-adjusted FFS expenditures for all assignable beneficiaries in an ACO's regional service area (a) can be interpreted as a weighted average of per capita risk-adjusted FFS expenditures for the ACO's assigned beneficiaries (b) and per capita risk-adjusted FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries in the region who are not assigned to the ACO (c), where the weight on (b) is the ACO's regional market share 345 and the weight on (c) is one minus the ACO's regional market share. Shown as an equation this is:

345 What is referred to here as the “ACO's regional market share” is the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO, which is the weight that it is applied to the national component of the national-regional blend under § 425.601(a)(5)(iv) and (v).

(a) = [(b) × (ACO's regional market share)] + [(c) × (1−ACO's regional market share)].

Thus, to remove the ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the regional expenditure calculation, we would insert the applicable values for (a), (b), and regional market share (all data elements already computed under the current benchmarking methodology) into the above equation and solve for (c) by rearranging the equation as follows:

(c) = {(a)−[(b) × (ACO's regional market share)]}/(1−ACO's regional market share).

By using such ACO- and regional-level values, this approach, performed separately by Medicare enrollment type, would avoid the need to calculate individualized ACO county-level risk-adjusted expenditures. As such, and by leveraging existing data elements, we noted our belief that this approach would pose relatively limited operational burden.

As described in the CY 2022 PFS final rule, some of the commenters responding to our initial comment solicitation indicated CMS' mathematical approach was “directionally correct,” relatively simple, and would work well in nearly every case while using data that CMS already produces (86 FR 65299 and 65300). However, in the CY 2022 PFS final rule we also noted that we share the concerns raised by several commenters that an approach to remove an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the assignable population could incentivize ACOs to “cherry-pick” healthier, lower-cost patients and could unfairly penalize ACOs that specialize in more medically-complex, higher-cost patients, running counter to one of the core dynamics we seek to address (86 FR 65300 and 65301). Similarly, we indicated that we are also concerned that this approach would incentivize market consolidation, as ACOs may anticipate a benefit to maintaining the largest market share in the region if their own assigned beneficiaries are removed from the assignable population. Additionally, removing an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the calculation of regional FFS expenditures could yield unstable estimates due to small sample sizes in areas with high program penetration and/or in rural areas. As a result, an approach that would remove an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the assignable population used to calculate regional FFS expenditures could result in a situation where the ACO's assigned population is relatively healthier and less costly than the assignable beneficiary population in the regional service area, which in turn would result in higher benchmarks for ACOs and thereby greater shared savings payments and reduced shared losses. More generous benchmark updates resulting from this approach could jeopardize CMS' use of the statutory authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to adopt such an alternative approach. In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we stated our belief that these concerns would be relevant to whether we adopt this alternative alone or adopt a combined approach, under which we would both remove the ACO's own assigned beneficiaries from the regional expenditure calculation and expand the ACO's regional service area for purposes of that calculation. We noted that expanding the regional service area may also mitigate the concern about unstable estimates due to small sample sizes.

In the proposed rule (87 FR 46184) we noted that while we believed this first alternative would partially address one of our core concerns by removing an ACO's own impact on the regional expenditures used in its benchmark calculations, it would not directly address the collective impact of multiple ACOs that may be operating in the same regional service area. We further noted that under the proposed changes described in the proposed rule designed to increase participation in the Shared Savings Program, we would expect this issue to grow more prominent over the coming years. 346 Additionally, we noted that we believed removing an ACO's own assigned beneficiaries from the regional expenditure calculation would be less effective at mitigating the ratchet effect than our proposed package of policies. For example, while this alternative might address how the ACO's prior performance affects regional factors used for purposes of calculating an ACO's rebased historical benchmark, this alternative would not address the concern that actual assigned beneficiary expenditures used in establishing an ACO's rebased historical benchmark may already be reduced by the ACO's prior success in reducing expenditures for its own assigned beneficiary population. We stated that the proposed adjustment for prior savings described in section III.G.5.c.(4) of the proposed rule would more directly address this concern by adding a portion of the ACO's prior savings during the benchmark years back into the rebased benchmark. Further, the proposal to include the ACPT in a three-way blended update factor as described in section III.G.5.c.(4) of the proposed rule would more directly “decouple” the update factor from actual observed expenditures, including expenditure reductions that are a result of savings already achieved by the ACO, than simply removing the ACO's own beneficiaries from the regional expenditure calculation.

346 CMS has set forth a goal that 100 percent of people with Original Medicare will be in a care relationship with accountability for quality and total cost of care by 2030.

We explained that one option that had been suggested by commenters during prior rulemaking is to remove all Shared Savings Program assigned beneficiaries from the assignable beneficiary population used to calculate each ACO's regional expenditures. In the proposed rule (87 FR 46185) we declined to consider removing all Shared Savings Program assigned beneficiaries from the assignable beneficiary population used to calculate each ACO's regional expenditures, as we had concerns about the short- and long-term sustainability and soundness of such an approach given the Agency's goal to expand participation in accountable care. We noted our belief that under the current level of program participation, an approach that would remove all Shared Savings Program assigned beneficiaries from the assignable population for each ACO's regional service area would yield unstable estimates of regional FFS expenditures for some ACOs, even if we were to expand the definition of an ACO's regional service area. We also noted that over time, we would expect this issue to worsen as Shared Savings Program participation expands.

We noted in the proposed rule that if we were to seek to finalize the first alternative of removing an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the calculation of regional expenditures either by itself or in the combination with expanding our definition of an ACO's regional service area in lieu of the proposed package of policies, we would potentially need to adjust the weights used in calculating the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark. Under the current regulations, for ACOs that have lower average spending than their regional service area, we use a weight of 35 percent in the first agreement period that an ACO is subject to a regional adjustment and a weight of 50 percent in the second and subsequent agreement periods the ACO is subject to a regional adjustment. If an ACO was serving an assigned population that is markedly healthier than other assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area, removing the ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the population used to compute regional expenditures would increase the magnitude of the regional adjustment, all else being equal. This could potentially lead to a dramatic increase in program costs as higher regional adjustments could translate to higher shared savings payments. Thus, we indicated that we would potentially need to consider reducing the weights used to calculate the regional adjustment to protect the Medicare Trust Funds. Determining the appropriate adjustment to the weights may be complicated by potential resulting consolidation. For example, assume for illustration purposes that the regional adjustment weights were reduced by 10 percentage points to bring the overall impact of regional adjustments back in line with the existing program design (that is, the weighting would be reduced from 35 to 25 percent in the first agreement period if positive, and from 50 percent to 40 percent in succeeding agreement periods if positive, etc.). If ACOs consolidate in order to concentrate the residual regional spending on fewer higher spending assignable beneficiaries, then the weights may need to be further reduced to offset the further increase in regional adjustments for consolidated ACOs.

Alternative 2: Expanding the Regional Service Area

The second alternative we considered in the proposed rule in place of the package of proposed policies would seek to reduce an ACO's influence on expenditures in its regional service area by expanding the ACO's regional service area. While we did not outline a specific approach to expanding an ACO's regional service area in the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39294), we sought comment on basing regional expenditure calculations on larger geographic areas, such as using State-level data or Core-Based Statistical Area (CBSA)-level data, or a combination of data for these larger geographic areas and county-level data (such as blended county/State expenditures). We also sought comment on what would constitute heavy market penetration by an ACO in its regional service area if we were to use an approach that would consider the ACO's level of penetration in determining whether to expand the ACO's regional service area.

For example, one potential approach to expanding the regional service area would be to define an ACO's regional service area to include all States in which at least one of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries resides and calculating regional expenditures as a weighted average of State-level risk-adjusted expenditures, with the weights reflecting the proportion of the ACO's total assigned beneficiaries residing in each State. This approach would therefore mimic the current calculation, but replace county-level data with State-level data.

Another possible approach would be to follow the existing methodology, but replace county-level risk-adjusted expenditure values with State-level risk-adjusted expenditure values for the corresponding State only for counties where an ACO has market share above a specified threshold, such as 50 percent. Such a blended approach would maintain greater geographic specificity than an approach that relies exclusively on State-level data, while still reducing the influence of an ACO's own beneficiaries in areas where the impacts may be most acute.

In its comment responding to our solicitation in the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule, MedPAC favored altering the calculation of regional spending by extending the ACO's regional service area to a larger market area (for example, CBSAs, health service areas, or hospital referral regions) in lieu of removing ACO assigned beneficiaries from the calculation of regional FFS expenditures, noting that expanding an ACO's regional service area would help to reduce an ACO's influence on its regional benchmark calculation without explicitly favoring certain categories of ACOs (for example, historically low spending ACOs). Other commenters on the comment solicitation in the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule also supported expanding the regional service area for the purposes of calculating regional FFS expenditures in cases where ACO market penetration is high, with some of those commenters suggesting this would mitigate concerns about the reference population being too small after removing the ACO's assigned beneficiaries. Some commenters specifically called for using a threshold of 50 percent market penetration in such an approach. For example, a commenter suggested expanding the regional service area to include all contiguous counties for ACOs that have high market penetration (for example, when an ACO's assigned beneficiary population in a county exceeds 50 percent), with allowances for a lower threshold under special circumstances. For a full summary of the considerations and comments received, refer to the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65301 and 65302).

As discussed in the proposed rule (87 FR 46185), like MedPAC, we believed that adopting only this second alternative to expand the regional service area would reduce the impact of an ACO's own expenditures on its regional expenditures without introducing incentives for favorable patient selection or concerns about increased volatility that may result from the first alternative of excluding an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the population of assignable beneficiaries used to determine regional FFS expenditures. However, like that first alternative, expanding the regional service area might not address concerns about ACOs' collective market penetration. We also noted our belief that this second alternative or a combined approach would do less to “decouple” the ACO's benchmark from observed FFS spending than the package of policies that we had proposed, and thus would likely be more limited in countering the ratchet effect. By contrast, the proposal to incorporate the ACPT into the growth rates used to update the benchmark would ensure that a portion of the update will remain unaffected by observed FFS spending. Furthermore, we noted in the proposed rule that we had concerns that use of a market penetration threshold may drive further market consolidation as ACOs seek to meet such a threshold.

We noted in the proposed rule that if we were to decide to finalize this second alternative or a combined approach in lieu of our proposed package of policies, there would be a number of operational factors that we would need to address with greater specificity, including, but not limited to: what alternative geographic area we would use, whether we would replace county-level data with data based on an alternate geographic area or use a blend, and, if using a blend, at what threshold it would be triggered, and what weights would be applied when aggregating expenditures across geographic areas.

On the balance, we noted that we believed the proposed package of policies described in sections III.G.5.c.(3) through (5) of the proposed rule would collectively be more effective at addressing the core concerns we articulated than the two alternatives described or a combined approach, and would avoid some of the alternatives' potential unintended consequences. However, we sought further comment on these alternatives, including various operational considerations we would need to specify if we were to finalize either alternative 1, alternative 2, or a combined approach. As stated previously, we noted that we would consider the comments received on these alternative options and the related operational considerations along with the comments on the proposed package of policies in the development of our final policies, and might consider adopting one or both of the alternatives discussed in this section in lieu of the package of proposed policies discussed in section III.G.5.c.(3) through (5) of the proposed rule.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on these alternative options for addressing concerns about the effect of an ACO's assigned beneficiaries on regional FFS expenditures in establishing, adjusting, updating, and resetting the ACO's historical benchmark and our responses:

Comment: A few commenters addressed the concerns we raised in the proposed rule about Alternative 1, under which we would remove an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the assignable beneficiary population used in regional expenditure calculations.

One commenter stated that they shared CMS' concerns outlined in the proposed rule regarding Alternative 1, noting that this approach is not adaptable or sustainable when CMS' objective is to grow participation in the Shared Savings Program with the goal of having all Original Medicare beneficiaries cared for by participants of value-based payment initiatives by 2030. Additionally, the commenter noted that as CMS nears this goal, eventually there will be regions where all Original Medicare beneficiaries are assigned to ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program or entities participating in other value-based payment initiatives and it will not be possible to calculate regional expenditures under this alternative option. Another commenter disagreed with certain concerns CMS outlined in the proposed rule regarding the proposed Alternative 1, stating that the concerns were unfounded. Specifically, the commenter noted that there is no evidence to support CMS' concerns regarding potential beneficiary selection or market consolidation that would result from removing an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the assignable population used in regional expenditure calculations. Additionally, the commenter stated that incentives for ACOs to consolidate currently exist in the program due to ACOs needing to compete against themselves, as well as each other, and that removing the ACO's assigned beneficiaries from regional calculations would not address the competition between ACOs but would eliminate the need for an ACO to compete against itself. Finally, the commenter described being less concerned than CMS that competition between ACOs in areas with multiple ACOs in a market is a major barrier to entry for ACOs, given that ACOs currently compete on trends, not on the absolute level of spending. The commenter noted that CMS creates county rates in Medicare Advantage in counties where the Original Medicare population is in the minority. The commenter noted that a counterfactual population would still be available for calculating regional trend factors within the Shared Savings Program even after removing the ACO's own assigned beneficiaries. It was unclear to this commenter why CMS can overcome the rate-setting issues in Medicare Advantage but not in the Shared Savings Program. The commenter also disagreed with CMS' concern that removing assigned beneficiaries would jeopardize the ability to use an alternative payment model adopted under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' input on the concerns laid out in the proposed rule with the alternative options. We continue to share the concern of the first commenter that removing the ACO's own assigned beneficiaries from regional FFS expenditure calculations will be problematic as ACO assigned beneficiaries account for a greater share of Medicare FFS beneficiaries over time. We disagree with the second commenter that we would retain valid counterfactual populations in all ACO regions after removing the ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the population of assignable beneficiaries in the region. We note that under the Medicare Advantage program, the counterfactual population used for county rate setting is the Medicare FFS population. The Shared Savings Program is already limited to the Medicare FFS beneficiary population; and removing the ACO's own assigned beneficiaries would further limit the number of beneficiaries in a counterfactual population. We believe that removing the beneficiaries from the region could leave highly penetrated ACOs with adjusted regional trends based on very small sample sizes where the resulting trend target could lack validity. For example, if the ACO's trend was 3 percent and the unadjusted regional and national trends were 5 percent, but the adjusted regional trend was 30 percent, then the target calculation under Alternative 1 would appear deeply problematic on its face.

We disagree with the second commenter that the concerns we laid out about beneficiary selection and market consolidation are unfounded. We continue to believe that a policy of removing an ACO's own assigned beneficiaries from the calculation of its regional FFS expenditures would create a strong incentive for both beneficiary selection and market consolidation. Removing an ACO's own assigned beneficiaries from the regional trend calculation would reward an ACO for serving an assigned beneficiary population whose spending grew slower between the benchmark period and the performance year than the spending of the remaining assignable FFS beneficiaries in the ACO's region. Additionally, removing an ACO's own assigned beneficiaries from the regional trend calculation would penalize an ACO for serving an assigned beneficiary population whose spending grew faster between the benchmark period and the performance year than the spending of the remaining assignable FFS beneficiaries in the ACO's region, which could make it harder for ACOs caring for medically complex and high cost beneficiaries to achieve shared savings and could cause such ACOs to drop out of the Shared Savings Program. These situations may occur, either intentionally or accidentally, through shifts in the types of services provided by ACO participants or shifts in the ACO professionals billing through those ACO participant TINs between the benchmark period and the performance year. That is, because the Shared Savings Program assignment methodology considers all primary care services billed under an ACO participant TIN that are furnished by an ACO professional with a primary specialty designation used in assignment, shifts in billing patterns or the populations served by any given ACO participant TIN could produce a biased residual trend at the regional level if an ACO's own assigned beneficiaries are not included in the respective benchmark and performance years. Removing the ACO's beneficiaries from regional FFS expenditures for purposes of calculating the regional trend could also incentivize consolidation so that an ACO could have more ACO-related spending excluded from its regional trend than if the ACO is only one of multiple ACOs in its market.

We also disagree with the commenter's statement that removing assigned beneficiaries would not jeopardize CMS's ability to use an alternative payment model under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act. Preliminary modeling indicates program outlays for shared savings could rise by roughly 15 to 40 percent or more initially under Alternative 1 (presuming use of the current two-way blended update factor) and could grow significantly beyond that if gaming via consolidation were to follow.

Comment: We received several comments in support of Alternative 1, Alternative 2, or a combination of the two.

The majority of commenters expressed support for Alternative 1, either by itself or as part of a combination of Alternative 1 and Alternative 2. Among these commenters, it was not always clear whether the commenter supported removing ACO-assigned beneficiaries from the regional FFS expenditures used in determining the regional component of the update factor (also referred to as the regional trend), from the regional FFS expenditures used in determining the regional adjustment, or both.

The majority of these commenters specified their preference for Alternative 1 over the proposed policy to incorporate a prospective, external factor (the ACPT) in growth rates used to update the historical benchmark. Among these commenters, most discussed how Alternative 1 would more directly or comprehensively address the “rural glitch” than the proposal to incorporate the ACPT as part of a three-way blended update factor. Another commenter indicated that they could not support CMS' proposal to address the rural glitch and that CMS should instead remove assigned beneficiaries from “benchmark calculations.” Some commenters who expressed a preference for Alternative 1 over the three-way blend that incorporates the ACPT offered an alternative suggestion to: (1) use the ACPT as the national component in the two-way blend; and (2) remove assigned beneficiaries from the regional component in the two-way blend. Another commenter preferred an approach that would combine Alternative 1 and Alternative 2 to remove the ACO's own assigned beneficiaries from the calculation of the regional trend, as well as to broaden the region when needed for ACOs with large market shares to allow for statistically valid non-ACO reference populations. One commenter who expressed a preference for Alternative 1 over the proposed three-way blend that incorporates the ACPT specified that while they supported removal of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the calculation of the regional trend, they did not support removal of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries for purposes of calculating the regional adjustment to the benchmark because they believe doing so could discourage participation by high-cost ACOs and work against the goal of equity.

One commenter indicated that they preferred Alternative 1, Alternative 2, or a combination of the two, over the prior savings adjustment proposal, asserting that the proposed formulas used in the latter seem quite complicated and the impact is unclear.

Some commenters that expressed general support for Alternative 1 did not expressly indicate a preference for that option over the other benchmarking proposals. These commenters stated generally that they supported CMS' removing the ACO's assigned beneficiaries from benchmark calculations. One commenter supported CMS' adopting either or both of the alternative policies to help mitigate the problems associated with including an ACO's own beneficiaries in benchmark calculations, particularly for ACOs that have a high market share in their region. One commenter stated that they agreed completely with the policy under the section heading “Alternative Options for Addressing Concerns About the Effect of an ACO's Assigned Beneficiaries on Regional FFS Expenditures in Establishing, Adjusting, Updating, and Resetting the ACO's Historical Benchmark” in the proposed rule, but the commenter did not specify further.

Some commenters urged CMS to adopt Alternative 2 to expand the ACO's regional service area, but did not specify an approach to doing so. One of these commenters also supported the prior savings adjustment proposal and the proposal to reduce the impact of the negative regional adjustment, but did not comment on CMS' proposal for a three-way blended updated factor so it was unclear if the commenter preferred Alternative 2 over the proposed changes to the update methodology. Another commenter suggested that CMS expand the ACO's regional service area for purposes of computing the regional component of the existing national-regional blended update factor and incorporate a set increase in the growth factor each year, preferring this combination over the proposed three-way blend. Another commenter recommended that CMS broaden the region when needed to allow for statistically valid non-ACO reference populations for ACOs with large market shares.

One commenter mentioned that CMS could remove all Shared Savings Program assigned beneficiaries from regional expenditure calculations in order to remove competition among ACOs operating in the same market, but did not recommend doing so, as they do not believe competition is a major barrier to entry for ACOs given that ACOs currently compete on trends, not on the absolute level of spending.

Response: We appreciate commenters' sharing their perspectives on Alternative 1 and Alternative 2. We interpret comments expressing preference for Alternative 1 over a three-way blended update factor that incorporates the ACPT as specifically requesting that CMS remove an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the regional component of the update factor. We interpret comments described as supportive of applying Alternative 1 for benchmark calculations as supporting the removal of an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from all benchmark calculations involving regional FFS expenditures, which includes not only the update factor, but also the regional adjustment.

As we stated in the proposed rule and have reiterated above, we are concerned that serious unintended consequences may arise from adopting Alternative 1. Specifically, we continue to believe that removing an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the assignable beneficiary population used to compute regional expenditures would amplify the benefit to ACOs of selecting lower cost patients and avoiding higher needs groups and drive market consolidation, while still failing to mitigate the problem in cases where multiple ACOs work in combination to drive down regional spending. Furthermore, it would increase program spending to such a degree that compliance with the requirements of section 1899(i)(3) of the Act regarding the use other payment models would be violated. We also have these same concerns with an approach that would remove all Shared Savings Program assigned beneficiaries from regional expenditure calculations, which was an option we declined to consider in the proposed rule.

As Alternative 2 does not include removing the ACO's own assigned beneficiaries from regional FFS calculations, we do not believe that the same serious unintended consequences would arise from that option, nor did we receive comments suggesting as such. However, although Alternative 2 may not have the same serious unintended consequences, we believe that adopting Alternative 2 alone without also adopting the other policies in this rule, would not effectively address the ratcheting effect that could be created by multiple Shared Savings Program ACOs operating in the same market. One way ratcheting could occur is if beneficiaries assigned to any Shared Savings Program ACO make up a significant enough proportion of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area to constrain regional FFS expenditures because expenditures among these Shared Savings Program assigned beneficiaries have already been reduced by ACO actions. Alternative 2, which would expand the regional service area, would not necessarily reduce the proportion of the assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's region that are assigned to Shared Savings Program ACOs. Rather, one ACO may see a reduced proportion of beneficiaries assigned to Shared Savings Program ACOs in its expanded region, while another may see an increased proportion. The change in the proportion depends on the degree of penetration of all Shared Savings Program ACOs in the ACO's expanded regional service area. Therefore, we remain concerned that Alternative 2 would not fully address the concerns raised by interested parties about ratcheting.

We continue to believe that the package of three benchmarking policies proposed in the proposed rule will adequately address concerns raised by interested parties about the ability of ACOs with high market penetration to generate shared savings. For the reasons discussed in the proposed rule, we believe that incorporating a prospective trend into the benchmarking methodology by including the ACPT in a three-way blended update factor would be an important step towards an administrative benchmarking approach. ACOs may have a greater incentive to enter and continue participation in the Shared Savings Program when their benchmarks are further decoupled from their ongoing observed FFS spending while continuing to reflect a measure of the ACO's efficiency relative to its region. This approach may also serve to anchor and stabilize benchmarks to the extent that the ACPT projected growth component of the three-way blend is an effective counterbalance when there are changes in an ACO's penetration in its regional service area that affect the weights given to the national and regional expenditure components in the current two-way blended update factor. Furthermore, as we discussed in the proposed rule, incorporating the ACPT, which is not influenced by actual performance by a single ACO, multiple ACOs in a region, or all ACOs nationally, as part of a three-way blend, will also address the wider issue of multiple neighboring ACOs pushing down the regional trend.

However, given the continued interest among interested parties in Alternative 2, and given that we do not have the same concerns about unintended consequences from expanding the definition of an ACO's regional service area, we believe that additional consideration of Alternative 2 is warranted. As we stated in the proposed rule, there are a number of operational factors that we would need to address with greater specificity before deciding to adopt such an approach, including, but not limited to: what alternative geographic area we would use, whether we would replace county-level data with data based on an alternate geographic area or use a blend, and, if using a blend, at what threshold it would be triggered, and what weights would be applied when aggregating expenditures across geographic areas.

We intend to continue to explore approaches for expanding the definition of the ACO's regional service area to use a larger geographic area to determine regional FFS expenditures that could be incorporated into the financial methodology in the future. We may revisit the issue of expanding the definition of the ACO's regional service area in future rulemaking.

d. Calculating County FFS Expenditures To Reflect Differences in Prospective Assignment and Preliminary Prospective Assignment With Retrospective Reconciliation

(1) Background

Under the current regulation at § 425.601, CMS uses risk-adjusted county-level FFS expenditures, determined based on expenditures for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to the relevant benchmark or performance year, to calculate factors used in establishing, adjusting and updating the ACO's historical benchmark. Specifically, we use these risk-adjusted county-level FFS expenditures to determine the ACO's regional service area expenditures, which are used to calculate the regional adjustment in accordance with § 425.601(a)(8) and the blended national-regional growth rates used to trend forward expenditures for BY1 and BY2 to BY3 dollars (§ 425.601(a)(5)), and to update the ACO's historical benchmark between BY3 and each performance year in the ACO's agreement period (§ 425.601(b)).

To calculate the risk-adjusted regional expenditure amounts under § 425.601(d) for each Medicare enrollment type, we first calculate risk-adjusted expenditures for the relevant benchmark year or performance year for assignable beneficiaries in each county in the ACO's regional service area in accordance with § 425.601(c). We then weight these county-level risk-adjusted expenditure amounts by the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in each county, and sum across all counties in the ACO's regional service area. Additionally, we use county-level assignable beneficiary person years in combination with the ACO's assigned beneficiary person years by county to calculate an ACO's share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area as described in § 425.601(a)(5)(v). These shares are, in turn, used to determine the weights used in calculating the blended national-regional trend and update factors as described in §§ 425.601(a)(5)(iv) and (v) and 425.601(b)(4).

The assignable population of beneficiaries used to calculate the county level values described above is identified in accordance with the definition of “assignable beneficiary” under § 425.20. Specifically, an assignable beneficiary means a Medicare FFS beneficiary who receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 12-month assignment window from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c). When first proposing to incorporate regional and national factors based on the assignable beneficiary population in the February 2016 proposed rule (81 FR 5843 through 5845), we discussed our consideration of which assignment window to use to identify the assignable population used to calculate inputs to the program's financial calculations. Specifically, we considered using the 12-month period based on a calendar year, which aligned with the assignment window for preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, or an offset 12-month period, which aligned with the assignment window for prospective assignment (for example, October through September preceding the calendar year). We proposed, and ultimately finalized, use of the 12-month period based on the calendar year for all ACOs, regardless of the ACO's assignment methodology (81 FR 37985 through 37989).

In the February 2016 proposed rule (81 FR 5843 and 5844), and as restated in the June 2016 final rule (81 FR 37985 and 37986), we expressed our belief that it is important to calculate regional and national FFS factors consistently program-wide, so as not to advantage or disadvantage an organization simply on the basis of the assignment methodology that applied under its track. We also noted our belief that this consistency would help to ensure a level playing field in markets where multiple ACOs are present and would also simplify program operations. We indicated that we would monitor for observable differences in the health status (for example, as identified by prospective HCC risk scores) and expenditures of the assignable beneficiaries identified using the 12-month calendar year assignment window, as compared to assignable beneficiaries identified using the offset assignment window (for example, October through September preceding the calendar year) and would, if warranted, address the need for additional adjustments to account for the use of assignable beneficiaries identified using an assignment window that is different from the assignment window used to assign beneficiaries to the ACO through future rulemaking.

In addition to these inputs based on county-level assignable beneficiary data, the Shared Savings Program's financial calculations also use the assignable beneficiary population to calculate a variety of factors based on national FFS expenditures, including:

• National growth rates used to trend and update the benchmark (see § 425.601(a)(5)(ii) and § 425.601(b)(2));

• Thresholds used to truncate beneficiary expenditures (see §§ 425.601(a)(4), 425.601(c)(3), 425.605(a)(3) and 425.610(a)(4)(ii));

• Caps applied to the regional adjustment (see § 425.601(a)(8)(ii)(c)); and

• Mean risk scores used to renormalize ACO- and county-level risk scores (see discussion in 83 FR 68007 through 68013).

Having gained experience using factors based on the assignable beneficiary population since PY 2017, and based on our monitoring of differences in expenditure and risk scores among beneficiaries identified using an assignment window based on the calendar year versus an offset assignment window, we have concluded that there exists a systematic bias in the calculations using county-level expenditures that favors ACOs under prospective assignment. Based on historical data, we have observed that for a given calendar year, risk-adjusted expenditures for populations identified based on the offset assignment window are systematically lower than risk adjusted expenditures for populations identified based on the calendar year assignment window, all else equal. In the calculation of the regional adjustment, the favorable bias arises for ACOs under prospective assignment because we are comparing risk-adjusted expenditure levels between populations identified based on different assignment windows for BY3: the ACO's own assigned beneficiary population identified based on the offset assignment window, and expenditures for the assignable population of beneficiaries in the ACO's region identified based on the calendar year assignment window. This mismatch causes the ACO's spending to look “low” relative to the regional spending, leading to a larger positive (or smaller negative) regional adjustment than we would observe if the assignment windows used to identify the two populations were consistent.

Based on modeling using historical benchmarks for ACOs participating in the 6-month performance year from July 1, 2019, through December 31, 2019, and after accounting for regional adjustment weighting and capping, we estimate that actual regionally adjusted historical benchmarks were 0.2 percent to 1.9 percent higher for ACOs under prospective assignment than they would have been if the regional adjustment had been calculated using risk-adjusted regional expenditures for assignable beneficiaries identified using the offset assignment window used under prospective assignment. The median estimated bias was 1.0 percent. We believe the program-wide impact of this bias was likely low in the initial years that the regional adjustment was in effect because only a subset of ACOs were originally eligible for the regional adjustment (ACOs that renewed for a second agreement period starting in January 2017, January 2018, or January 2019), and a relatively small share of those ACOs were under prospective assignment (ACOs participating in Track 3 or the Track 1+ ACO Model). Starting with agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, all ACOs became eligible to receive a regional adjustment and to select their assignment methodology in accordance with §§ 425.226(a)(1) and 425.400(a)(4)(ii). With this latter change, the share of ACOs under prospective assignment grew considerably, from around 17 percent in PY 2019 to 38 percent in PY 2022. Because of this, we believe that the bias has a larger impact currently than in earlier years.

Additionally, while risk-adjusted expenditure trends have generally been consistent for prospectively and retrospectively determined assignable populations, this stable relationship was disrupted in the PHE for COVID-19 when decreased utilization led to expenditures for prospectively determined populations falling more sharply in CY 2020 than for retrospectively determined populations (due to an increase in the number of beneficiaries that did not utilize any care after being prospectively assigned to an ACO). This appears to have generated an additional 1.0 percentage point increase in measured savings (relative to total benchmark) for ACOs under prospective assignment in PY 2020 beyond the effect of the biased regional adjustment. However, we note that between CY 2020 and CY 2021 expenditures grew more quickly for prospectively determined populations, causing cumulative trends from years preceding the PHE for COVID-19 to CY 2021 to return to a roughly parallel state for the two populations. Although the disruption of expenditure trends between prospective and retrospectively assignable populations was temporary in this case, the disruption of stable expenditure trends during the PHE for COVID-19 highlights the possibility of future biases in the blended national-regional growth factor. If the blended growth factor is based on an assignable population with a different expenditure growth trend than the expected trend in expenditures of an ACO's assigned population, an ACO could receive an artificial increase or decrease in savings.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we stated our belief that without correction the impact of this bias has the potential to grow costlier to the Trust Funds over time. For one, more ACOs will be subject to higher weights used in calculating the regional adjustment as they progress in the Shared Savings Program, which is expected to lead to larger regional adjustments and, by extension, larger biases than those estimated in our analysis using benchmark data from the 6-month performance year beginning July 1, 2019, in which most ACOs were subject to the lowest regional adjustment weights. Second, as more ACOs move to the ENHANCED track with its 75 percent sharing rate, aggregate savings against a favorably biased benchmark will be shared by ACOs at a higher rate. We also stated that preventing further influence of the bias would be important for ensuring good stewardship of Medicare Trust Fund dollars. Addressing this bias in Shared Savings Program calculations for ACOs under prospective assignment would also ensure a more level playing field for ACOs under both assignment methodologies and would improve the comparability of ACOs' performance under the Shared Savings Program irrespective of the ACO's chosen assignment methodology.

Further, if left unresolved, this bias would need to be taken into account as part of the regulatory impact analysis for evaluating proposed modifications to policies under the Shared Savings Program, and in considering whether CMS has met the requirements for use of other payment models under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act. The authority to use other payment models under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act is necessary for implementing key aspects of the Shared Savings Program's financial methodology, including the two-sided models and the blended national-regional growth factors used to update the historical benchmark (as discussed in section III.G.5.c.(3) of the proposed rule), as well as the proposal to provide AIPs to eligible ACOs (discussed in section III.G.2 of the proposed rule). This authority is contingent on the statutory requirement that other payment models adopted under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act must be determined to improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to Medicare FFS beneficiaries and not to increase program spending relative to a baseline estimated for the Shared Savings Program were it not to employ modifications authorized under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act. A predictable favorable bias would increase program spending (particularly in combination with modifications like two-sided risk sharing that require authority from section 1899(i)(3) of the Act), and therefore, jeopardize CMS' ability to satisfy the requirements of section 1899(i)(3) of the Act for use of other payment models.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we stated our belief that modification to the methodology for calculating regional FFS expenditures is necessary and timely to mitigate the observed favorable bias for ACOs under prospective assignment.

(2) Revisions

To remove the favorable bias and bring greater precision to the calculation of factors based on regional FFS expenditures, we proposed to modify the calculation of risk-adjusted regional expenditures used in the regional adjustment and in the regional component of the blended factors used to trend and update the benchmark (including, if finalized, the three-way blend proposed in section III.G.5.c.(3) of the proposed rule). As proposed, for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, we would calculate risk-adjusted regional expenditures using county-level values computed using an assignment window that is consistent with an ACO's assignment methodology selection for the performance year under § 425.400(a). That is, for ACOs selecting prospective assignment, we would use an assignable population of beneficiaries that is identified based on the offset assignment window (for example, October through September preceding the calendar year) and for ACOs selecting preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, we would continue to use an assignable population of beneficiaries that is identified based on the calendar year assignment window. In the proposed rule, we noted our belief that removing the current mismatch in the assignment window used to determine the assignable population, and the assigned population for ACOs under prospective assignment would create a more equitable historical benchmark across assignment methodologies and help protect the Trust Funds. For consistency, we also proposed to use an assignable population identified using an assignment window that corresponds to an ACO's selected assignment methodology to calculate other factors based on county-level data, namely, the weights used in computing the blended trend and update factors.

We did not propose to change the way we compute national factors that require identifying assignable populations. That is, all factors used in calculations that are based on the national assignable FFS population would continue to be computed using an assignable population identified based on the calendar year assignment window. As discussed in the proposed rule, this choice was driven by two factors. First, for simplicity, we favored using the same set of national values for all ACOs. Second, we did not believe the national factors, as currently computed, contribute to the current bias that we have observed, and which is the motivation for the proposed policy changes. While using a national assignable population based on an offset assignment window to compute the national component of trend and update factors could help to further protect against unanticipated biases in those calculations, the national component represents a small portion of the blend for most ACOs. Thus, the additional protection provided would be limited. However, we indicated that we intend to continue monitoring how national assignable expenditure trends hinge on the selection of assignment methodology and may return to this issue in future rulemaking if significant biases exist that may systemically impact the national component of the trend and update factors.

We also noted that we currently make available public use files (PUFs) containing the county level expenditures, risk scores and assignable beneficiary person years for each calendar year on the data.cms.gov website, specifically: (1) County-level Aggregate Expenditure and Risk Score Data on Assignable Beneficiaries PUF, 347 and (2) Number of ACO Assigned Beneficiaries by County PUF. 348 Interested parties are able to use these files to replicate the calculation of risk-adjusted regional expenditures or the weights used in the blended trend and update factors. We also provide ACOs with program reports that include information on the geographic distribution of their assigned beneficiary populations which can also be used along with the county-level data based on the assignable population for modeling purposes.

347 Refer to Data.CMS.gov, County-level Aggregate Expenditure and Risk Score Data on Assignable Beneficiaries, available at https://data.cms.gov/medicare-shared-savings-program/county-level-aggregate-expenditure-and-risk-score-data-on-assignable-beneficiaries .

348 Refer to Data.CMS.gov, Number of Accountable Care Organization Assigned Beneficiaries by County, available at https://data.cms.gov/medicare-shared-savings-program/number-of-accountable-care-organization-assigned-beneficiaries-by-county .

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we noted that if the proposal was finalized, we anticipated making two sets of county-level values publicly available for each calendar year: we would continue to provide county-level data on the assignable population identified based on the calendar year assignment window and would also make available county-level data based on the assignable population identified using the offset assignment window. Additionally, we would update the public use files that reflect the distribution of each ACO's assigned beneficiary population by county to include a field indicating each ACO's assignment methodology selection for the applicable performance year.

We noted our belief that this additional data would facilitate modeling of the proposed changes to the calculation of county-level FFS expenditures used in Shared Savings Program benchmark calculations. Concurrent with the issuance of the proposed rule, we provided through the Shared Savings Program website at www.cms.gov/sharedsavingsprogram/ data files containing risk-adjusted county-level FFS expenditures for 2018-2020 calculated based on an assignable beneficiary population identified using an offset assignment window.

We proposed new regulations at §§ 425.652, 425.654, and 425.656 to reflect this proposal. (Refer to section III.G.5.i. of the proposed rule for a discussion of the organization of the proposed provisions in 42 CFR part 425, subpart G.)

In the proposed rule, we noted that in order to finalize the proposed changes to the regional component of the update factor, we would need to use our statutory authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act. We referred readers to section III.G.5.c.(3) of the proposed rule and the Regulatory Impacts Analysis section for related discussions regarding the use of this authority with respect to the proposed modifications to the update factor.

We sought comment on these proposals.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposed modifications to the methodology for calculating county FFS expenditures to reflect differences in prospective assignment and preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation and our responses:

Comment: Several commenters supported the proposal to modify the calculation of risk-adjusted regional expenditures used in the regional adjustment and in the regional component of the blended factors used to trend and update the benchmark. Some of these commenters outlined specific reasons for their support. Two commenters supported the idea of removing the selection bias that currently favors ACOs under prospective assignment. One commenter agreed with CMS that COVID-19 has created significant variation and supported the idea that an ACO's assignment methodology should apply to all aspects of the benchmarking methodology. Another commenter supported using assignment windows in benchmark calculations that are consistent with an ACO's selected assignment methodology.

Response: We thank commenters for their support of the proposal to align the assignment windows used to calculate county FFS expenditures with an ACO's selected assignment methodology.

Comment: Multiple commenters requested that CMS mitigate any potential negative impacts that this proposal could have on ACOs under prospective assignment. Commenters listed their concerns, which included potentially lower benchmarks for ACOs under prospective assignment, a disproportionate impact on specific ACOs/ACO cohorts (the specific ACO cohorts were not identified by the commenters). A couple of these commenters provided specific recommendations for CMS on how to alter the proposal to limit its potential adverse impacts. Specifically, one commenter requested that CMS consider capping the adverse impacts of this policy for ACOs under prospective assignment. This commenter provided an example under which the impact on a given prospective ACO's benchmark would be limited to no more than a +/− 0.5 percent change as a result of this policy. Another commenter recommended that CMS mitigate the potential negative impacts of the policy by phasing it in over a period of years, making the change optional, or limiting its influence on historical benchmarks.

Response: We appreciate commenters' sharing their concerns about ACOs receiving lower benchmarks as a result of the proposed modifications to the methodology for calculating county FFS expenditures. However, given the observed historical bias favoring ACOs under prospective assignment and the fact that implementing the proposed policy change would align a component of benchmark calculations with an ACO's selected assignment methodology, we believe that finalizing the proposed policy would bring greater consistency to the program, create a more neutral choice between assignment methodologies, and increase incentives for ACOs under the prospective assignment methodology to grow more efficient over time. Therefore, we disagree with the commenters' assertions that this policy could have unfair, adverse impacts for ACOs under prospective assignment or for other cohorts of ACOs.

Comment: One commenter requested more information on the underlying cause of higher historical benchmarks for ACOs under prospective assignment. This commenter also requested that, in the event this proposal is finalized, CMS consider revising its policy for annual wellness visits (AWVs) to transition to a calendar year basis (the commenter did not provide any rationale for the suggested AWV changes).

Response: We believe that the underlying cause of the more favorable historical benchmarks for ACOs under prospective assignment was clearly described in section III.G.5d.(1) of the proposed rule. Risk-adjusted expenditures for populations identified based on the offset assignment window are systematically lower than risk-adjusted expenditures for populations identified based on the calendar year assignment window, all else equal. CMS has conducted additional modeling of the impact of this bias since the proposed rule was issued. Based on this updated modeling using historical benchmarks for ACOs participating in PY 2020, we estimate that actual regionally adjusted historical benchmarks were 0.2 percent to 2.0 percent higher for ACOs under prospective assignment than they would have been if the regional adjustment had been calculated using risk-adjusted regional expenditures for assignable beneficiaries identified using the offset assignment window used under prospective assignment. The median estimated bias was 1.0 percent. Additionally, we decline to consider the commenter's suggestion that CMS consider revising its policy for annual wellness timelines because it is outside the scope of the proposal being considered.

Comment: Two commenters expressed concern that this proposal would grant a potential structural advantage to ACOs under the preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation methodology. One commenter stated that although they agree in principle with the proposal to align the assignment windows used to calculate benchmarks with the assignment windows used to assign beneficiaries and calculate assigned beneficiary expenditures, their internal analysis suggests that implementing the proposal would generate a bias in favor of ACOs under retrospective assignment. This commenter claimed that their analysis using data from the largest TINs in the country suggests that ACOs may receive a more favorable regional adjustment under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation than under prospective assignment if this proposal was implemented. However, the commenter did not elaborate on the specific methodology used to reach this conclusion or the reasons that ACOs would receive more favorable regional adjustments under preliminary prospective assignment. The other commenter raised concern that the proposed policy “could widen a structural advantage for retrospective assignment”. Both commenters suggested that ACOs may change assignment methodologies from prospective to preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation due to this policy change, which could add operational burden and cost.

Both commenters requested that CMS take more time to understand the impact of the proposed policy before implementing it and provided additional recommendations for CMS' consideration, including establishing a pilot period before finalizing the proposal, offering transparency to ACOs by making final settlement results available that utilize both calendar year and offset assignment windows to calculate county FFS expenditures, and offering ACOs waiver flexibility with respect to this policy.

Response: We had some difficulty understanding the commenters' conclusions because some of the data analysis methodologies underlying their assertions were unclear and the sources of a potential bias favoring ACOs electing preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation were not thoroughly described. Based on the observed historical trend that risk-adjusted expenditures for populations identified based on the offset assignment window are systematically lower than risk-adjusted expenditures for populations identified based on the calendar year assignment window, we believe that it is appropriate to align the methodology for determining the components of the benchmark calculation with an ACO's chosen assignment methodology. We believe that the proposed approach would also support a more neutral choice between assignment methodologies and minimize bias in benchmark calculations. However, we plan to continue monitoring for biases for or against any assignment methodology across the program as a whole in the future. With respect to the commenters' suggestion that CMS take more time to study the impact of the proposed policy, we note that CMS has studied and modeled this proposal using multiple years of historical data and made public files available for stakeholders to assess its likely impact. We believe that this level of analysis and transparency will help the commenters and others interested in further reviewing how this policy may relate to their ACO.

After consideration of these public comments, we are finalizing as proposed the modifications to our methodology for calculating county FFS expenditures to provide for the use of separate assignment windows for ACOs depending on their selected assignment methodology. We are finalizing our proposal to specify in the new regulation at § 425.654 the methodology for calculating county FFS expenditures with an offset assignment window for ACOs selecting prospective assignment and with a calendar year assignment window for ACOs selecting preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation and for calculating regional expenditures using these county FFS expenditures. We are also finalizing our proposal to specify in the new regulations at §§ 425.652 and 425.656 the use of regional expenditures calculated under § 425.654 in certain benchmark calculations.

e. Improving the Risk Adjustment Methodology To Better Account for Medically Complex, High-Cost Beneficiaries and Guard Against Coding Initiatives

(1) Background

Currently, for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, we account for changes in severity and case mix of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population when establishing the benchmark for an agreement period and also in adjusting the benchmark for each performance year during the agreement period. In accordance with § 425.601(a)(3), in establishing the benchmark, we adjust expenditures for changes in severity and case mix using CMS Hierarchical Condition Category (CMS-HCC) prospective risk scores (herein referred to as prospective HCC risk scores). Pursuant to § 425.601(a)(10), we further adjust the ACO's historical benchmark at the time of reconciliation for a performance year to account for changes in severity and case mix for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year (refer to § 425.605(a)(1), (a)(2); § 425.610(a)(2), (a)(3)). In making this risk adjustment, we make separate adjustments for the population of assigned beneficiaries in each Medicare enrollment type used in the Shared Savings Program (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible). We use prospective HCC risk scores to adjust the historical benchmark for changes in severity and case mix for all assigned beneficiaries, subject to a cap of positive 3 percent for the agreement period (referred to herein as the “3 percent cap”). This cap is the maximum increase in prospective HCC risk scores allowed for each agreement period, such that any positive adjustment between BY3 and any performance year in the agreement period cannot be larger than 3 percent. That is, the prospective HCC risk ratios (ratio of performance year risk score to the BY3 risk score) applied to historical benchmark expenditures to capture changes in health status between BY3 and the performance year will never be higher than 1.030 for any performance year over the course of the agreement period. This cap is applied separately for the population of beneficiaries in each Medicare enrollment type. 349

349 Refer to the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68007 through 68013), section on “Risk Adjustment Methodology for Adjusting Historical Benchmark Each Performance Year”. See also, the Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses and Assignment Methodology Specifications (version #10, January 2022), section 3.6, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-1 .

The 3 percent cap was finalized through the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68013) to address concerns with the prior approach for risk adjustment, which used a methodology that differentiated between newly assigned and continuously assigned beneficiaries, as defined in § 425.20. The issues raised by interested parties included concerns that the risk adjustment methodology did not adequately adjust for changes in health status among continuously assigned beneficiaries between the benchmark and performance years and that performing risk adjustment separately for newly and continuously assigned beneficiaries created uncertainty around benchmarks and made it difficult for ACOs to anticipate how risk scores would affect their financial performance (refer to 76 FR 67916 through 67919, 80 FR 32777 through 32778, 81 FR 37962 through 37968, 83 FR 68008 through 68013). As a result, in the December 2018 final rule, we modified the risk adjustment methodology to provide for the use of prospective HCC risk scores to adjust the historical benchmark for changes in severity and case mix for all assigned beneficiaries, subject to a cap of positive 3 percent for the agreement period, for agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years (83 FR 68013).

As we stated in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we believe this current policy has several advantages relative to the original risk adjustment methodology distinguishing between newly and continuously assigned beneficiaries, including: allowing for some upward growth in prospective HCC risk scores between the benchmark period and the performance year for an ACO's entire assigned beneficiary population, providing better recognition for changes in beneficiary health status between the benchmark period and the performance year, and providing greater clarity for ACOs than the previous methodology, while still limiting the impact of ACO coding initiatives. However, interested parties remain concerned about the program's risk adjustment methodology, including the 3 percent cap. In the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule, we solicited comment on several issues related to the Shared Savings Program's risk adjustment methodology (86 FR 39294 and 39295).

• Approaches, generally, to improving the risk adjustment methodology for the Shared Savings Program, and specifically for ACOs with medically complex, high-cost beneficiaries.

• Approaches to risk adjustment that would balance the need for accurate and complete coding, while protecting against incentivizing coding intensity initiatives by ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers (which may be even more problematic for ACOs with high penetration in their region) that increase risk score growth above the existing 3 percent cap.

• Alternate approaches that would increase the cap on an ACO's risk score growth in relation to risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area.

• The potential interactions between policies to remove assigned beneficiaries from the assignable beneficiary population used to calculate regional FFS expenditures and growth rates, and policies addressing regional risk score growth.

For a full summary of the comments submitted in response to our comment solicitation, we refer readers to the relevant discussion in the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65302 through 65306). Among the comments received, many commenters expressed concern about the existing 3 percent cap on positive risk score growth, as well as the absence of a cap (or floor) on negative adjustments to account for risk score decreases. Several commenters indicated that the current 3 percent cap on risk score growth is unfair over a 5-year period, suggesting that the cap is too low over a period of this length. Additionally, several commenters suggested that the existing policy is driving inequity and may disadvantage ACOs that serve more vulnerable populations or beneficiaries with complex medical needs. Some commenters explained that beneficiaries who are in the disabled and the aged/dual eligible Medicare enrollment types are, in most combinations, more than twice as likely to have risk score growth above the cap as those who are in the aged/non-dual eligible category. These concerns are similar to certain comments made in response to the original proposal for the 3 percent cap and summarized in the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68010 through 68012). Additionally, some commenters indicated that due to a variety of factors, such as sample size and volatility, the rates at which Medicare enrollment types are subject to the 3 percent cap on risk score growth are often significantly different. A commenter explained that there can also be significant risk score volatility when the high-risk patient population is small. This concern was also raised in response to the original proposal for the current policy (83 FR 68012). Several commenters on that proposal recommended that any cap be applied at the aggregate level rather than the enrollment type level, with one commenter suggesting that we cap the prospective HCC risk ratios in the aggregate across the four beneficiary enrollment types to account for smaller sample sizes and resulting higher volatility for certain enrollment types.

Many of the comments received in response to the comment solicitation in the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule also expressed concern that the current policy places a cap on the ACO's risk score growth but does not restrict regional risk score growth that is reflected in the regional component of the update factor, noting that this penalizes ACOs in markets where a region's risk score growth exceeds the 3 percent cap (86 FR 65304). Other commenters, notably MedPAC, expressed support for CMS' considerable caution in the area of risk adjustment, noting that population-based models can be highly susceptible to coding incentives and that the Shared Savings Program does not include a retrospective coding adjustment to offset these incentives. MedPAC recommended that CMS should address the underlying incentives for coding intensity and the accuracy of risk adjustment before considering any policy that would increase the risk score growth cap (86 FR 65304).

(2) Revisions

In response to these concerns, we considered three options to modify the existing 3 percent cap on risk score growth: (1) Account for all changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year prior to applying the 3 percent cap on positive adjustments resulting from changes in prospective HCC risk scores, and apply the cap in aggregate across the four Medicare enrollment types (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible); (2) Apply the 3 percent cap in aggregate across the four Medicare enrollment types (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible) without first accounting for changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year; and (3) Allow the cap on an ACO's risk score growth to increase by a percentage of the difference between the current 3 percent cap and risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area, where the percentage applied would be equal to 1 minus the ACO's regional market share (continuing our consideration of the approach described in the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39294)).

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we stated our belief that the first two options for modifications to the risk adjustment methodology (applying the cap on risk score growth in aggregate across Medicare enrollment types, with or without first accounting for changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year) would address several of the concerns raised by interested parties by: accounting for higher volatility in prospective HCC risk scores for certain enrollment types due to smaller sample sizes; allowing for higher benchmarks than the current risk adjustment methodology for ACOs that care for larger proportions of beneficiaries in aged/dual eligible, disabled and ESRD enrollment types (which are frequently subject to the cap on risk score growth currently); and continuing to safeguard the Trust Funds by limiting returns from coding initiatives. We also explained our belief that the third option (to allow the cap on an ACO's risk score growth to increase by a percentage of the difference between the current 3 percent cap and risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area) would address some of the commenters' concerns about the possible impacts of regional prospective HCC risk score growth, but would not address the multiple other concerns addressed by options 1 and 2. We also noted that the approach described in the second option includes a component of the first option (applying the cap on an ACO's risk score growth in aggregate across Medicare enrollment types). We also noted that we had considered the third option independently from the first and second options and did not consider using the third option in combination with either the first or second option. That is, we did not consider an approach under which we would account for the difference between the 3 percent cap and the risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area (third option) in combination with applying a cap on risk score growth in aggregate across Medicare enrollment types, with or without first accounting for changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year (the first and second options, respectively). We stated that we view these two approaches to be inconsistent with each other, as the third approach allows an ACO's risk score growth to rise above 3 percent based on risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area, whereas the first and second options would retain the 3 percent cap, but apply it at the aggregate level (with or without first accounting for changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year).

As discussed in the proposed rule, after careful consideration and modeling of the impacts of these three potential modifications to the existing 3 percent cap on positive prospective HCC risk score growth, we proposed to use the authority granted by section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act to adjust the benchmark for beneficiary characteristics and other such factors as the Secretary determines to be appropriate, to modify the existing 3 percent cap on risk score growth using the first option. We also sought comment on the second and third options as potential alternatives to the proposed approach. We noted that we would consider the comments received on these alternative options along with the comments on the proposal to adopt the first option in the development of our final policy and indicated that we might consider adopting one of these alternatives in place of the proposed approach if we conclude that it would better address the concerns with the current risk adjustment methodology.

Under the proposal of the first option, an ACO's aggregate prospective HCC risk score would be subject to a cap equal to the ACO's aggregate growth in demographic risk scores between BY3 and the performance year plus 3 percentage points. Specifically, we proposed that we would:

• Account for all changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year prior to applying the 3 percent cap on positive adjustments resulting from changes in prospective HCC risk scores.

• Then apply the 3 percent cap in aggregate across the four Medicare enrollment types (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible).

350 Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses and Assignment Methodology Specifications (version #7, February 2019), section 3.4.2, available at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/sharedsavingsprogram/Downloads/Shared-Savings-Losses-Assignment-Spec-V7.pdf .

Demographic risk scores are based on certain demographic attributes that do not vary with the beneficiary's health condition, such as age, sex, Medicaid status, and original reason for Medicare entitlement. 350 Unlike prospective HCC risk scores, demographic risk scores are not subject to coding intensity because they do not use diagnosis information. In the proposed rule, we noted that accounting for all changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year prior to applying the 3 percent cap on positive prospective HCC risk score growth could allow for higher benchmarks than the current methodology for ACOs that have experienced increases in health risk among their assigned beneficiary populations, while still safeguarding the Trust Funds by limiting returns due to coding initiatives. We also noted that the CMS Innovation Center's Global and Professional Direct Contracting (GPDC) Model, which will transition to the redesigned and renamed Accountable Care Organization (ACO) Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (REACH) Model on January 1, 2023, will also take into account the underlying demographics of a model participant's aligned beneficiary population when determining whether risk score growth will be capped starting in PY 2024. 351

351 CMS. Accountable Care Organization (ACO) Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (REACH) Model. February 24, 2022. Available at https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/fact-sheets/accountable-care-organization-aco-realizing-equity-access-and-community-health-reach-model .

As proposed, the positive 3 percent cap (after accounting for changes in demographic risk scores) would also apply in aggregate across the four Medicare enrollment types (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, and aged/non-dual eligible). In other words, we would calculate a single aggregate value for the cap equal to the dollar-weighted average growth in demographic risk scores across the four enrollment types plus 3 percentage points. We would only apply this cap to risk score growth for a particular enrollment type if the aggregate growth in prospective HCC risk scores, calculated as the dollar-weighted average growth in prospective HCC risk scores across the four enrollment types, exceeds the value of the cap. We noted that we believed this would make it less likely that the prospective HCC risk scores for Medicare enrollment types with smaller populations, typically populations of ESRD, disabled, or aged/dual eligible beneficiaries, would be subject to the cap. We also explained that these smaller populations are more likely to experience random variation in risk score growth as a relatively small number of assigned beneficiaries with large changes in prospective HCC risk scores can have an outsized impact on the average score for the Medicare enrollment type.

To implement the new cap, we proposed to follow these steps:

• Step 1: Determine demographic risk score growth for each Medicare enrollment type. Demographic risk score growth is measured as the ratio of the ACO's performance year demographic risk score for an enrollment type to the ACO's BY3 demographic risk score for that enrollment type. Before calculating these demographic risk ratios, the demographic risk scores for each enrollment type for each year would be renormalized by dividing by the national mean demographic risk score for that enrollment type for that year.

• Step 2: Calculate the dollar-weighted average demographic risk ratio across the four enrollment types to obtain a single aggregate weighted average demographic risk ratio. The dollar weight for each enrollment type would be equal to historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type divided by the sum of historical benchmark expenditures across all enrollment types. Historical benchmark expenditures for each enrollment type would be calculated as per capita historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type multiplied by the ACO's BY3 assigned beneficiary person years for that enrollment type. The aggregate dollar-weighted average demographic risk ratio would be computed by multiplying the risk ratio for each enrollment type by its respective dollar weight and then summing across the four enrollment types. We noted that the approach of using an aggregate dollar-weighted average in this calculation would be similar to the approach used in the Shared Savings Program's original benchmarking methodology to determine whether demographic factors would be used to adjust risk scores for an ACO's continuously assigned beneficiaries. 352

352 Refer to the Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses and Assignment Methodology Specifications (version #7, February 2019), section 3.4.2, available at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/sharedsavingsprogram/Downloads/Shared-Savings-Losses-Assignment-Spec-V7.pdf .

• Step 3: Calculate the sum of the aggregate dollar-weighted average demographic risk ratio from Step 2 and 0.030. This would represent the aggregate cap.

• Step 4: Determine prospective HCC risk score growth for each Medicare enrollment type. Prospective HCC risk score growth would be measured as the ratio of the ACO's performance year prospective HCC risk score for that enrollment type to the ACO's BY3 prospective HCC risk score for that enrollment type. Before calculating these prospective HCC risk ratios, the prospective HCC risk scores for each enrollment type for each year would be renormalized by dividing by the national mean prospective HCC risk score for that enrollment type for that year.

• Step 5: Calculate the aggregate growth in prospective HCC risk scores by calculating the dollar-weighted average prospective HCC risk ratio across the four enrollment types to obtain a single aggregate dollar-weighted average prospective HCC risk ratio, using the same dollar weights and the same approach described in Step 2.

• Step 6: Determine if the ACO will be subject to the cap. If the ACO's aggregate dollar-weighted average prospective HCC risk ratio determined in Step 5 is less than the aggregate cap determined in Step 3, no cap would apply to the prospective HCC risk ratio for any enrollment type, even if the prospective HCC risk ratio for a given enrollment type is higher than the aggregate cap. If the ACO's aggregate dollar-weighted average prospective HCC risk ratio determined in Step 5 is greater than or equal to the aggregate cap determined in Step 3, proceed to Step 7.

• Step 7: Compare the prospective HCC risk ratio for each enrollment type calculated in Step 4 to the aggregate cap determined in Step 3. If the prospective HCC risk ratio for a given enrollment type is greater than the aggregate cap, the prospective HCC risk ratio for that enrollment type would be set equal to the aggregate cap. If the prospective HCC risk ratio for a given enrollment type is less than or equal to the aggregate cap, no cap would apply to the prospective HCC risk ratio for that enrollment type.

The resulting prospective HCC risk ratios would then be multiplied by the ACO's historical benchmark expenditures for the relevant Medicare enrollment type at the time of reconciliation for a performance year to account for changes in severity and case mix for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year.

Table 76 provides a numeric example of the proposed methodology for a hypothetical ACO that is determined to be subject to the cap:

For this hypothetical ACO, the dollar-weighted average demographic risk ratio is 1.026, meaning that demographic risk score growth averaged across the four enrollment types was 2.6 percent from BY3 to the performance year for the ACO's assigned beneficiaries, when measured against national mean risk score growth. To calculate the cap, we would add 0.03 to this value, arriving at an aggregate cap of 1.056. This ACO is determined to be subject to the cap because its dollar-weighted average prospective HCC risk ratio of 1.070 was higher than the aggregate cap. When comparing the aggregate cap to the prospective HCC risk ratio for each individual enrollment type, risk score growth for both the aged/dual eligible and aged/non-dual eligible enrollment types would be constrained by the cap. In this example, the aggregate cap that is ultimately applied is higher than the current 3 percent cap, meaning that this hypothetical ACO would benefit from the proposed policy relative to the current policy.

In the second numeric example described in Table 77, the ACO's aggregate demographic risk ratio is less than 1 and its aggregate cap of 1.028 is less than the current effective risk score cap of 1.030. In this case, the ACO's dollar-weighted average prospective HCC risk ratio of 1.013 is below the aggregate cap meaning that no cap would be applied to the prospective HCC risk score growth for any enrollment type, even though the ACO's ESRD, disabled, and aged/dual eligible populations all have prospective HCC risk ratios above the aggregate cap. This ACO would also benefit from the proposed policy relative to the current policy, with its benefit solely stemming from the use of an aggregate cap.

While the examples above show ACOs that would benefit from the proposed risk adjustment policy relative to the current policy, we acknowledged in the proposed rule that there are ACOs that would receive a lower updated benchmark under the proposed policy, all else being equal. Namely, ACOs with a dollar-weighted average demographic risk ratio less than 1 found to be subject to the aggregate cap (which by default, will be less than 1.030) would have their upward risk score growth constrained more by the proposed aggregate cap than the existing 3 percent cap.

We simulated the impact of the proposed policy change using PY 2020 financial reconciliation data from ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019. This simulation found that 45 percent of ACOs would have had a higher updated benchmark with the proposed policy compared to the current policy, 5 percent would have had a lower updated benchmark with the proposed policy, and 50 percent would have been unaffected (that is, because they were not subject to any cap under either policy). Fifty-three ACOs had their prospective HCC risk ratio capped for at least one Medicare enrollment type under the proposed policy, compared to 177 ACOs under the current policy. Among ACOs that were capped under the current policy but not the proposed policy, many had prospective HCC risk score growth above 1.030 for one or more of the typically smaller enrollment types (that is, ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible) but not for their aged/non-dual eligible population. Table 78 illustrates that 47 percent of ACOs were subject to the current 3 percent cap imposed at the enrollment type level for one or more of the ESRD, disabled or aged/dual eligible enrollment types versus 17 percent for aged/non-dual eligible. Under the proposed policy, the share would fall to 14 percent for both groups.

Based on this modeling, in the proposed rule we explained our belief that a significant share of ACOs would either be unaffected by or benefit from the proposed policy, especially those with increases in health risk as measured by demographic risk ratios, while a small share would do worse, likely reflecting decreases in health risk for their assigned beneficiary population as measured by demographic risk ratios. Additionally, we noted that the prospective HCC risk ratios for ESRD, disabled, and aged/dual eligible Medicare enrollment types would be much less likely to be capped under this proposed policy which would improve the incentives for ACOs to treat these medically complex, high-cost populations. At the same time, we noted that we believed the proposed policy would continue to be protective of the Trust Funds by continuing to limit incentives for coding intensity, as it would retain the 3 percent cap on growth in prospective HCC risk scores after accounting for all changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population.

Under the second option that we considered, we would continue to employ a fixed 3 percent cap on positive adjustments to prospective HCC risk scores, but we would apply the cap at the aggregate level. Specifically, the current 3 percent cap on risk score growth would apply in aggregate across the four Medicare enrollment types (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, and aged/non-dual eligible) instead of being applied separately for the population of beneficiaries in each Medicare enrollment type. We would only apply the current 3 percent cap on risk score growth for a particular enrollment type if the ACO's aggregate growth in prospective HCC risk scores, calculated as the dollar-weighted average growth in prospective HCC risk scores across the four enrollment types, exceeded the value of the cap.

In the proposed rule, we explained that one advantage of this second, alternative option over the proposed approach, which allows aggregate prospective HCC risk score growth above 3 percent when aggregate demographic risk score growth is positive, is that no ACOs would receive a lower updated benchmark under this methodology compared to the current approach. However, according to our simulations using PY 2020 financial reconciliation data from ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, while around 5 percent of ACOs would have had higher benchmarks under this second, alternative approach compared to the proposed approach, around 12 percent would have had lower benchmarks under this approach compared to the proposed approach. Thus, we noted that we believed that this second, alternative approach would, in aggregate, be less advantageous to ACOs than the proposed approach.

Under the third option that we considered, which we also described in the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39294), we would allow the cap on an ACO's risk score growth to increase by a percentage of the difference between the current 3 percent cap and risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area. The percentage applied would be equal to 1 minus the ACO's regional market share. For example, if regional risk score growth for a particular enrollment type was 5 percent and the ACO's regional market share was 20 percent, we would increase the cap on the ACO's risk score growth for that enrollment type by an amount equal to the difference between the regional risk score growth and the existing cap (2 percent) multiplied by one minus the ACO's regional market share (80 percent). Thus, the ACO would face a cap for this enrollment type equal to 4.6 percent instead of 3 percent (3 percent + (2 percent × 80 percent)). This approach would raise the existing cap while limiting the ability for ACOs with high penetration in their regional service areas to increase their cap by engaging in coding intensity initiatives that significantly raise their regions' prospective HCC risk scores. While this third, alternative option could potentially mitigate concerns raised by some commenters about the impacts of regional prospective HCC risk score growth, modeling suggested that relatively fewer ACOs would benefit under this alternative approach as compared to the proposed methodology incorporating demographic risk score growth. As we explained in the proposed rule, a key reason for this is that a relatively small share of ACOs affected by the existing 3 percent cap on risk score growth operate in regional service areas where regional risk score growth was greater than 3 percent.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we noted that we still have concerns that allowing the cap on an ACO's risk score growth to increase with regional risk score growth could incentivize ACOs, particularly those highly penetrated in their regional service areas, to engage in coding behavior that would increase their cap, even if this incentive would be mitigated to some degree by limiting the allowable increase in the cap based on the ACO's market share. We also noted that we believed that our proposed methodology would avoid this undesired incentive while still accounting for changes in health risk for an ACO's assigned beneficiary population to a greater extent than the current policy and would also help to address cases where regional risk score growth stems from higher volatility due to small sample sizes or shifting demographics within a regional service area.

As discussed in the proposed rule, our modeling suggests that a majority of ACOs that operate in regions with risk score growth in excess of 3 percent for at least one Medicare enrollment type would have a higher updated benchmark under the proposed policy than the current policy. In addition, we explained our belief that our proposal to incorporate a prospective, external factor in the growth rates used to update the historical benchmark (see section III.G.5.c.(3) of the proposed rule) would further help to mitigate concerns raised by some commenters about the impacts of regional risk score growth, by decreasing the weight placed on the two-way blend of national and regional growth rates when updating an ACO's historical benchmark for each performance year in the ACO's agreement period.

Although requested by some commenters in previous rulemaking, we declined to consider an approach that would limit the impact of prospective HCC risk score decreases. As we have described in past rulemaking (83 FR 68011), we remain concerned that such an approach would encourage favorable risk selection. If ACOs seek to attract low-cost beneficiaries or avoid high-cost beneficiaries, they could lower their performance year expenditures without any corresponding adjustment to their benchmark due to the cap on negative prospective HCC risk adjustments. We noted that we continued to believe that this effect would be detrimental to medically complex patients, who may miss the opportunity to receive better coordinated care through an ACO, as well as to the Medicare Trust Funds. We also declined to consider an approach that would impose a direct cap on risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area, as requested by some commenters as we were concerned that such an approach would create adverse incentives for coding behavior, especially for ACOs that are highly penetrated in their regional service areas. Currently, ACOs that are highly penetrated in their regional service area have a disincentive to engage in coding initiatives, as it could increase risk score growth in their regional service area and potentially decrease the value of the regional component of their update factor. We noted that capping risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area could change these incentives and encourage ACOs to engage in coding initiatives.

We proposed to revise the regulations governing risk adjustment under the BASIC track and the ENHANCED track at § 425.605(a)(1) and § 425.610(a)(2), respectively, to reflect the proposed modifications to the risk adjustment methodology.

We sought comment on the proposed changes to the risk adjustment methodology for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024. While we noted that we believed that the proposed modifications to the program's risk adjustment methodology in conjunction with the other policies we were proposing would provide the best balance between addressing concerns raised by interested parties and limiting incentives for coding intensity and risk selection, we also sought comment on the two alternatives considered. We noted that we would consider the comments received on these alternative options along with the comments on our proposed changes to the risk adjustment methodology, and that we might consider adopting one of these alternatives in place of the proposed approach if we conclude that it would better address the concerns with the current risk adjustment methodology.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposal to improve the risk adjustment methodology to better account for medically complex, high-cost beneficiaries and guard against coding initiatives and our responses:

Comment: Many commenters supported the proposal to account for all changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year prior to applying the 3 percent cap on positive adjustments resulting from changes in prospective HCC risk scores, and to apply the cap in aggregate across the four Medicare enrollment types (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible).

Several commenters stated that they believe this proposed change to risk adjustment methodology would create a benchmark that is fairer and more representative of an ACO's assigned population. One commenter noted that effective risk adjustment discourages ACOs from taking steps to attract healthier beneficiaries or avoid sicker ones and makes program participation more attractive by reducing ACOs' exposure to financial risk stemming from fluctuations in patient mix. This commenter noted that “relaxing” the cap on risk score growth, as the proposed policy would do in some instances, would allow risk adjustment to do a better job of meeting these goals in cases where ACOs experience large increases in risk scores.

Several supportive commenters noted the proposed policy would continue to effectively guard against coding initiatives while balancing incentives for ACOs to care for high-risk beneficiaries. One commenter stated that the current 3 percent cap not only limits reward for coding initiatives but may also limit incentives for ACOs to care for high-risk beneficiaries. This commenter stated that the proposed policy would increase incentives for ACOs to care for underserved populations, while also protecting against coding initiatives and unwarranted spending increases since demographic risk score changes are less susceptible to coding initiatives than claims-based prospective HCC risk scores. Another commenter gave an example of how demographic risk scores are less susceptible to coding initiatives; one input to demographic risk scores is age, and a beneficiary is either 75 years old, or they are not, so age is not subject to coding intensity. That commenter stated that because they believe the only reason to have a cap on risk score growth is to address concerns around coding initiatives and demographic risk scores are not subject to coding initiatives, they support accounting for all changes in demographic risk scores. Another commenter explained their support for the proposal to apply the 3 percent cap in aggregate across the four Medicare enrollment types, as it would allow certain segments of the population to have “appropriate coding documentation” while also safeguarding against coding initiatives. Another commenter stated they supported the proposed changes because they would allow the risk adjustment methodology to better reflect changes to an ACO's assigned population without any unintended increase in coding intensity. One commenter explained that ACO coding initiatives represent a waste of real resources, since resources that ACOs invest in identifying and coding patient diagnoses will likely do “little or nothing” to improve patient care. Another commenter noted that they appreciate what CMS is doing to try to lessen the impact of coding initiatives, however, they also referenced concerns about the complexity of risk adjustment, and the potential for the current risk adjustment policy to drive inequity.

Many commenters stated that they support the proposed policy as it better incentivizes ACOs to care for certain populations, such as high-cost, medically complex, high-need, dually eligible, or underserved beneficiaries, with some saying this policy would create more equity than the current policy. Several commenters explained their belief the current policy is driving inequity. A few commenters stated that current policy may disadvantage ACOs that serve more vulnerable populations of beneficiaries with complex medical needs, and that the policy proposal offers an improvement over the current policy. A few commenters also noted that this proposal would better account for medically complex, higher cost beneficiaries, with one stating that that these beneficiaries would benefit from the proposal and another stating that the proposal would allow for more accurate benchmarks for ACOs that care for those populations. Another commenter added that the proposed policy would ensure ACOs are not disincentivized from serving high-risk groups. A few commenters explained that the proposed policy would strengthen incentives for ACOs to care for underserved populations, with one explaining that enabling more “accurate and appropriate” payment for high-need beneficiaries will help facilitate increasing the number of ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program who are focusing on enhancing equity by targeting underserved populations. Another commenter explained that the proposed policy is an improvement over current policy, as the current policy “underemphasizes” demographic risk factors and encourages ACOs to underserve beneficiaries with lower “social determinant of health profiles,” such as beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

Many commenters indicated that one way the proposed policy would help to incentivize care for high-risk beneficiaries is through applying the 3 percent cap in aggregate across the four Medicare enrollment types, instead of capping by enrollment type. One commenter noted that applying the cap in aggregate will help to mitigate ACOs' avoiding providing care for certain underserved groups of beneficiaries. A few commenters noted that application of the current cap by enrollment type negatively impacts or disadvantages ACOs serving certain types of beneficiaries such as beneficiaries in the ESRD, disabled, and aged/dual enrollment types, with several commenters explaining that these enrollment types are more likely to be subject to the current 3 percent cap than the aged/non-dual enrollment type. One commenter stated that the current policy of capping by enrollment type creates a “perverse” incentive to avoid patients from high-risk enrollment types in favor of patients from enrollment types that are less likely to be subject to the 3 percent cap. Another commenter expressed their support for the aggregate cap because they believe that the current methodology does not do enough to adjust for changes in health status among beneficiaries that are assigned in one of the benchmark years and remain assigned in the performance year.

A few commenters noted that applying the cap at the aggregate level will help account for higher volatility in year-to-year changes in risk scores across the Medicare enrollment types, with one noting this would be especially true for the ESRD enrollment type. Another commenter explained that this change would make it less likely for the cap to apply when there are smaller sample sizes for high-risk enrollment types (that is, ESRD, disabled, and aged/dual). One commenter noted that among their own ACOs they see considerable variation in the risk ratios between the enrollment types, whereas they would expect that coding initiatives would increase all the risk ratios uniformly. Therefore, the commenter noted the variation is likely due to underlying changes in the beneficiary populations, not coding initiatives.

Response: We agree with commenters that the proposed policy would address several of the concerns previously raised by interested parties by allowing for higher benchmarks than the current risk adjustment methodology for ACOs that care for larger proportions of beneficiaries in aged/dual eligible, disabled and ESRD enrollment types and continuing to safeguard the Trust Funds by limiting returns from coding initiatives. The proposed policy also accounts for potentially significant changes in prospective HCC risk scores for certain enrollment types due to the smaller number of assigned beneficiaries in those enrollment types.

Comment: A few commenters who supported the proposed policy also offered caution about the policy. One commenter cautioned that it may introduce more complexity and less financial certainty. Several commenters cautioned that the proposed policy could hurt some ACOs if their demographic risk score drops.

Response: While we agree that incorporating changes in demographic risk scores and using an aggregate cap across all enrollment types would increase the complexity of the risk adjustment cap methodology, we believe the benefits of the proposed policy, as described in in section III.G.5.e.(2) of the proposed rule, outweigh the increased complexity. We disagree that our proposal would result in less financial certainty. We believe that the proposed policy would better account for changes in prospective HCC risk scores for certain enrollment types due to smaller numbers of assigned beneficiaries and reflect underlying changes in health risk for ACO's assigned beneficiary population as measured by demographic risk ratios.

Based on our modeling of the proposed policy as described in section III.G.5.e.(2) of the proposed rule, we believe that a significant share of ACOs, especially those with increases in health risk as measured by demographic risk ratios, would either be unaffected by or benefit from the proposed policies, while a small share of ACOs would have lower benchmarks, likely reflecting decreases in health risk for their assigned beneficiary population as measured by demographic risk ratios.

In addition to simulations discussed in section III.G.5.e.(2) of the proposed rule, which used PY 2020 financial reconciliation data, we have also simulated the impact of the proposed policy change using PY 2021 financial reconciliation data from ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019. This simulation found that 81 out of 332 ACOs had their prospective HCC risk ratio capped for at least one Medicare enrollment type under the proposed policy, compared to 185 ACOs under the current policy. Among ACOs that were capped under the current policy but not the proposed policy, many had prospective HCC risk score growth above 1.030 for one or more of the typically smaller enrollment types (that is, ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible) but not for their aged/non-dual eligible population. Table 79 illustrates that 50 percent of ACOs were subject to the current 3 percent cap imposed at the enrollment type level for one or more of the ESRD, disabled or aged/dual eligible enrollment types versus 30 percent for aged/non-dual eligible. Under the proposed policy, the share would fall to below 25 percent for both groups.

Based on both the PY 2020 and PY 2021 modeling, ACOs would be much less likely to have prospective HCC risk ratios for ESRD, disabled, and aged/dual eligible Medicare enrollment types capped under the proposed policies, which should improve the incentives for ACOs to treat these medically complex, high-cost populations. At the same time, we believe that the proposed policy would continue to protect the Trust Funds by continuing to limit incentives for coding intensity, as it would retain the 3 percent cap on growth in prospective HCC risk scores after accounting for all changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population.

Comment: One commenter was opposed to the proposal to account for changes in demographic risk scores before applying the 3 percent cap. This commenter did not indicate if they supported or opposed the proposal to apply the 3 percent cap in aggregate across the four Medicare enrollment types. The commenter stated that accounting for changes in demographic risk scores would hurt their ACO. They explained that the population of Medicare beneficiaries in their region is growing at more than double the national average, especially among those who have just “aged-in” to Medicare. They expressed concern that this increase in younger Medicare beneficiaries would lower demographic risk scores over time. The commenter stated that these demographic risk scores would be low compared to the “reality of [the] population's true risk status”. They urged CMS to consider a possible unintended consequence to this policy proposal, which they believed could encourage ACOs to “cherry-pick” patients based on demographics like age, since younger patients may have lower demographic risk scores.

Response: As described earlier in this section, we believe that changes in demographic risk ratios reflect actual changes in health risk for ACO's assigned beneficiary population. We also believe that the proposal to account for changes in demographic risk ratios would create incentives for ACOs to care for older beneficiaries, as well as beneficiaries in the aged/dual, disabled and ESRD enrollment types as risk score growth for these enrollment types would be less likely to be capped, as discussed earlier in this section. We are unsure why the commenter believes that the demographic risk scores of their ACO's assigned beneficiaries do not reflect the population's actual risk status. However, we note that after accounting for changes in demographic risk ratios, the proposed policy would continue to allow for up to three percent growth in prospective HCC risk scores. At this time, we believe that accounting for changes in demographic risk ratios prior to applying the 3 percent cap on positive adjustments resulting from changes in prospective HCC risk scores is appropriate, but we will continue to monitor the impacts of the cap and may propose further refinements to our risk adjustment policies in future rulemaking.

Comment: MedPAC supported accounting for all changes in demographic risk scores prior to applying the cap but disagreed with our proposal to maintain the 3 percent cap after accounting for demographic risk scores, believing it should be reduced. More specifically, MedPAC noted its belief that there is insufficient justification for maintaining the current 3 percent cap after accounting for demographic risk score changes. They explained their belief that part of the impetus for the current policy of allowing risk scores to increase by 3 percent was that it would better account for demographic changes that are largely out of an ACO's control. MedPAC did not believe that further risk score growth above the current 3 percent cap was justified. MedPAC expects that changes in an ACO's population health status would be adequately accounted for by the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model, and the current 3 percent cap would likely cover anomalies when ACO populations have deteriorating health status.

MedPAC disagreed with CMS that continuing to allow for a 3 percent cap would incentivize ACOs to care for underrepresented beneficiaries. MedPAC explained that applying the 3 percent cap after accounting for demographic risk score changes would primarily benefit ACOs that serve disproportionately more white and aged/non-dual beneficiaries. MedPAC explained that allowing this increase in risk scores presumes that CMS expects ACOs' assigned populations to become sicker more rapidly than the national population of assignable beneficiaries within each of the four Medicare enrollment types and pointed to statements by CMS in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule that indicate otherwise. MedPAC also stated that despite the fact that the non-ACO population is increasingly comprised of higher spending beneficiaries and medically complex patients, the growth in risk scores for this population has been slower than that of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs.

MedPAC explained its belief, based on its own analysis and other recent research, 353 that the majority of CMS-HCC risk score growth for beneficiaries assigned to ACOs comes from coding initiatives and not from changes in beneficiary demographics or deteriorating health status. Another commenter, who did not clearly state whether they supported or did not support the proposed policy, stated that there should be guardrails to deter ACOs from taking advantage of an increased cap with coding initiatives.

353 Citing Chernew, M.E., J. Carichner, J. Impreso, et al. 2021. Coding-driven changes in measured risk in accountable care organizations. Health Affairs 40, no. 12 (December). https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/full/10.1377/hlthaff.2021.00361 .

Response: When we finalized the 3 percent cap in the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68007 through 68013), we acknowledged that the policy balanced competing concerns between the need to allow for some upward growth in prospective HCC risk scores between the benchmark period and the performance year and the concern that those risk scores, in general, are susceptible to coding initiatives. We believe that the proposed policy continues to balance these competing concerns. Specifically, we believe that the proposed policy would be protective of the Trust Funds by limiting incentives for coding intensity as it would retain the 3 percent cap on growth in prospective HCC risk scores after accounting for all changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population, while also allowing for more significant changes in prospective HCC risk scores for certain enrollment types with smaller numbers of assigned beneficiaries and for potentially higher benchmarks than the current risk adjustment methodology for ACOs that care for larger proportions of high risk beneficiaries in the aged/dual eligible, disabled and ESRD enrollment types.

While we recognize there is a risk of rewarding coding initiatives by maintaining the 3 percent cap on growth in prospective HCC scores, there are also reasons to allow some prospective HCC risk score growth beyond demographic risk score growth. For example, there may be natural variation over time in the health of an ACO's assigned population, an ACO may establish new services that provide care for medically complex populations in their regional service area, or an ACO may attract a sicker population over time in response to Shared Savings Program policies designed to encourage ACOs to care for these populations. In addition, some increased coding by ACO participants and ACO providers/ suppliers may be appropriate when more complete clinical information at the point of care is required to help facilitate care coordination, quality improvement, and population management activities. We also recognize that certain acute events, such as a heart attack, which almost always requires a hospitalization, are likely to have an upward impact on prospective HCC risk scores that is not attributable to provider coding initiatives. Additionally, if an ACO begins to serve previously underserved beneficiaries during an agreement period, those beneficiaries may not have had complete diagnosis coding due to lack of access to care. As a result, capturing their healthcare needs may also have an upward impact on prospective HCC risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population that is not attributable to provider coding initiatives.

While we believe that there are reasons to allow for some upward growth in prospective HCC risk scores between the benchmark period and the performance year, the proposed policy would continue to guard against coding initiatives. As described earlier, the proposed policy retains the 3 percent cap on growth in prospective HCC risk scores after accounting for all changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population. Additionally, ACOs experiencing a decrease in health risk for their assigned beneficiary population as measured by demographic risk ratios would likely have an aggregate demographic risk ratio less than 1, meaning that their aggregate cap on prospective HCC risk score growth would be less than the current cap of 3 percent. We also note that the cap on positive growth of prospective HCC risk scores remains the same for the entirety of an ACO's 5-year agreement period. We believe it is reasonable to expect some increase in beneficiary health risk over a 5-year period even in the absence of coding initiatives. Although we believe that the proposed cap on positive risk adjustments is reasonable and appropriate, we will continue to monitor impacts of the cap and may propose further refinements to our risk adjustment policies in future rulemaking.

Comment: Several commenters that were supportive of the proposed policy asked that the cap applied at the aggregate level after accounting for all changes in demographic risk scores be raised above 3 percent. Several requested that the cap be raised to 5 percent. Another commenter requested that CMS remove the cap on increases in diagnosis risk scores, as well as demographic risk scores.

Many commenters explained their request for a higher cap. Several commenters stated their belief that a 3 percent cap is insufficient and/or arbitrary when applied over the course of a 5-year agreement period. Several stated that allowing risk scores to increase by only 3 percent after adjusting for demographic risk scores will not fully assist outlier ACOs that will still be capped under the proposed policy. A couple of commenters cited findings from NAACOS that 87 percent of ACOs would have had at least one enrollment type capped at either positive or negative 3 percent (even though the current and proposed policy do not include a cap on risk score decreases) within the first 3 years of their agreement period, with 88 percent of ACOs capped in the first performance year, 85 in the second performance year, and 92 percent in the third performance year. However, these commenters did not provide further details on how their modeling was developed.

Many commenters noted a higher cap would incentivize ACOs to care for certain populations, such as high-cost, medically complex, high-risk, underserved and/or beneficiaries with new or worsening illnesses. Several commenters stated their belief that under the current cap ACOs can be penalized for accurately coding and maintaining the same level of risk over their agreement period. A few commenters explained that raising the cap above 3 percent would reduce the negative impact of physicians accurately identifying patient needs, especially in underserved communities. Many commenters similarly stated that that a higher cap would decrease the penalty on ACOs for accurate coding of conditions that may have historically been underreported for underserved beneficiaries.

A couple of commenters explained that as ACO penetration increases in underserved areas, where patients have not had appropriate access to high quality care, physicians in ACOs will increasingly identify underreported healthcare needs and a static cap on risk score growth will penalize this appropriate effort to accurately document the health of the community. According to the commenters, the cap on risk score growth is a meaningful disincentive for treating underserved communities that CMS should address if it is to be successful in meeting the goal of increasing ACO participation in these areas. Another commenter explained that ACOs serving these underserved populations must devote and deploy significant resources to capturing and care planning around the needs of complex patients who have not had sufficient contact with the health care system to have a grasp on their health risks and disease burden or that need education around managing chronic illnesses. The commenter stated that, as a result, it is crucial that risk adjustment accounts for the actual risk burden of assigned beneficiaries so an ACO's benchmark reflects the full amount of resources needed to provide comprehensive care to this beneficiary population. That commenter concluded that a higher risk score growth cap will encourage providers and suppliers in underserved areas to join ACOs in larger numbers, knowing that their resource allocations will be sufficiently accounted for in benchmark adjustments that reflect the actual risk burden of their assigned beneficiary population.

Another commenter stated that maintaining the cap on risk scores does not allow ACOs to capture the significant turnover and changes in health status that their beneficiaries experience, and that this is particularly true as the burden of illness in the Medicare population increases over time. Another commenter similarly stated that even if the 3 percent cap on positive risk score increases applies only after accounting for changes in demographic risk scores, the increased costs of individuals who develop a medically complex, high-cost condition after they have been assigned to an ACO will not be adequately accounted for. That commenter explained that failing to adjust fully for changes in beneficiary health status ignores the fact that even when care is optimally managed, individuals become sicker, and therefore, more expensive to care for as disease progresses. The commenter gave as an example the case of a beneficiary who has been continuously attributed to an ACO and is diagnosed with cancer, stating that it is inappropriate for the ACO to be responsible for that additional cost without adjustments from Medicare for higher spending related to that beneficiary.

A few commenters stated that increasing the cap is important given the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on healthcare utilization. One of those commenters explained that the COVID-19 PHE caused significant decreases in patient encounter volume, and as a result, ACOs were unable to capture “large swaths” of beneficiaries' HCCs. Thus, the commenter explained, most ACO risk scores for 2021 were “extremely” low but they will likely increase significantly in subsequent years because patients have returned to the office. A couple of commenters noted another reason that risk scores may increase in subsequent years is that many patients delayed care during the COVID-19 pandemic and may now have a higher severity of illness. One of those commenters concluded that applying the existing cap artificially penalizes ACOs for patients that delayed or missed receiving care because they needed to stay in the safety of their homes during the pandemic. A few commenters noted that ACOs that started an agreement period in January of 2022, and for which 2021 is their third benchmark year, would be significantly impacted by the COVID-19 PHE because they are likely to have significant risk score growth between BY3 and the performance years of their agreement period. Specifically, these commenters noted that risk scores for 2021 would be based on diagnoses captured the year before, which is 2020. The reduction in services in 2020 due to the pandemic may have caused an artificial reduction in risk scores in 2021 that, in turn, will result in ACOs starting a new agreement period in 2022 being more likely to be subject to the 3 percent cap.

One commenter, who requested that CMS raise the cap on risk score changes by at least 10 percent, noted that in an assessment they conducted they saw a number of diagnoses that are documented in a medical record but that are not submitted in claims due to the structural limitation of the number of diagnoses that can be submitted on a CMS-1500 claim form. The commenter did not provide additional rationale for how raising the risk score cap to at least 10 percent would be applied relative to the existing or proposed risk adjustment methodology.

Response: At this time, we decline to lift the cap on positive adjustments resulting from changes in prospective HCC risk scores above 3 percent. We believe that the proposed policy, under which the cap would apply after accounting for changes in demographic risk scores, will allow for higher benchmarks than the current risk adjustment methodology for ACOs that care for larger proportions of beneficiaries in aged/dual, disabled and ESRD enrollment types, while still protecting against increases in coding intensity. We believe that further increasing the cap would allow for excessive returns for coding initiatives. While we do not intend to hinder appropriate efforts to accurately document the health of the beneficiaries, we note, as discussed earlier in this section, that MedPAC has observed that the majority of the CMS-HCC risk score growth for ACOs comes from coding initiatives and not from changes in beneficiary demographics or deteriorating health status.

With regards to the concerns raised by commenters about the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on risk scores, we believe that CMS' methodology of renormalizing risk scores by dividing by the national mean will mitigate the impacts of any changes in ACO risk scores that may have stemmed from the impact of COVID-19 such that the cap will not inappropriately limit risk score growth for ACOs that started a new agreement period in 2022. Although we believe that the proposed cap on positive risk adjustments is reasonable and appropriate, we will continue to monitor impacts of the cap and may propose further refinements to our risk adjustment policies in future rulemaking.

With regard to the commenter that requested that CMS remove the cap on diagnosis risk scores, as well as demographic risk scores, we clarify that the 3 percent cap is on diagnosis, or HCC, risk scores, not demographic risk scores. Regarding the comment raising concerns about structural limitations on reporting diagnosis codes on the CMS-1500 claim form, we note that the allowance of twelve diagnosis codes is the national format for CMS FFS claims as developed by the National Uniform Claim Committee and claims used to compute risk scores for both assigned and assignable FFS beneficiaries under the Shared Savings Program contain a maximum of twelve diagnosis codes ensuring comparability between the two populations.

Comment: Several commenters requested that a cap be placed on negative changes in risk scores, also referred to as a symmetrical cap. One commenter who opposed the proposed policy suggested that CMS apply a symmetrical 5 percent cap across all enrollment types. Some of the commenters that were generally supportive of the proposed policy but that requested the cap be increased to 5 percent also requested a symmetrical downward cap of negative 5 percent. Many of those commenters seemed to indicate that if the cap could not be raised to 5 percent, a downward 3 percent cap should be applied along with the positive 3 percent cap. There were several other commenters who also requested a negative cap be instituted in addition to a positive cap, but did not request the cap be increased, instead asking for a symmetrical 3 percent cap.

A few of the commenters requesting a downward cap stated that an ACO may experience a potential decrease in its risk score if others in their region increase their coding intensity, and that this could be made worse for ACOs with large numbers of specialists who have fewer opportunities to increase their risk score. Another commenter stated that a downward cap would protect ACOs with less sophisticated coding efforts from large adjustments in their benchmark resulting from increased national coding and provide more predictability. One commenter noted that the application of a symmetrical floor on an ACO's risk score would be similar to the risk adjustment model the Innovation Center uses in the GPDC Model (which will transition to the redesigned and renamed ACO REACH Model on January 1, 2023). One commenter stated that a higher, symmetrical cap is important given the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. This commenter stated that patients appear to be sicker and more medically complex than before the pandemic, so a higher symmetrical cap amount would more appropriately account for risk adjustment changes over a 5-year agreement period.

Response: As described in section III.G.5.e.(2) of the proposed rule, we decline to consider an approach that would limit the impact of prospective HCC risk score decreases at this time. As we have described in past rulemaking (83 FR 68011), we remain concerned that such an approach would encourage favorable risk selection. If ACOs seek to attract low-cost beneficiaries or avoid high-cost beneficiaries, they could lower their performance year expenditures without a corresponding adjustment to their benchmark due to the cap on negative prospective HCC risk adjustments. We noted that we continue to believe that this effect would be detrimental to medically complex patients, who may miss the opportunity to receive better coordinated care through an ACO, as well as to the Medicare Trust Funds. We will continue to monitor the impacts of HCC risk score changes and may propose further refinements to our risk adjustment policies in future rulemaking.

Comment: A couple of commenters that requested raising the cap applied to ACO prospective HCC risk score growth to 5 percent additionally requested that the cap be allowed to further increase for ACOs in regions where risk score growth exceeds five percent, with one stating that a flat percentage cap will always disadvantage ACOs in regions where risk score growth exceeds the cap and another stating that this additional flexibility would ensure ACOs are not disadvantaged by operating in underserved communities.

Many commenters wrote in support of capping regional risk ratios in addition to capping ACO risk ratios. Several commenters stated that it is critical that whatever policy CMS finalizes for capping ACOs' risk score growth the same policy must also apply to regional risk scores. Several commenters noted that CMS should not apply adjustments to only one side of the equation, referring to capping ACO risk ratios without capping regional risk ratios, with many of them saying this would lead to unintended consequences and another saying it would have inequitable results. One commenter stated that by not capping regional risk ratios, CMS would be sending a message that is not aligned with reducing inequity. Several commenters stated that not capping increases in regional risk scores will stifle growth in exactly the areas CMS wants growth the most. A few commenters explained that lack of regional risk score growth caps incentivizes ACOs not to grow in places with certain types of populations, such as those with increasing health burdens, higher needs, and/or higher numbers of aged/dual and disabled enrollees. Several commenters stated that they do not believe that it was CMS's intent to financially penalize ACOs for growing in counties where beneficiaries are getting sicker but that this is effectively what is done by applying the cap only to the ACO and not to the regional risk ratios.

One commenter stated that they agree with CMS' statements in the proposed rule and comments made by CMS officials that there is reason to be concerned about regional risk ratios being subject to coding intensity, but that they disagree with CMS that it is a small problem when the risk ratio for a region exceeds the cap. Several commenters cited analysis by Milliman 354 which found that 15 percent of Shared Savings Program beneficiaries already reside in counties that have risk ratios above the 3 percent cap. Many of these commenters noted that this means that every ACO in those counties will incur losses for every additional at-risk beneficiary they establish a relationship with. One commenter added that Milliman's analysis also found that in 2020 40 percent of ACOs served regions where at least one Medicare enrollment type exceeded the cap, and that by 2024 Milliman estimates that one in four ACOs will serve regions with risk ratios greater than three percent. This commenter stated that they knew of specific ACOs that have seen their savings rate cut in half due to their region exceeding the three percent cap. Another commenter stated that since the risk scores used to calculate the risk-adjusted regional benchmark trend are not capped, the regional risk score trend could reduce an ACO's benchmark by more than 3 percent.

354 Kildow, J., Gusland, C., Kramer, M.J., & Li, C. Evaluating the financial cost of the asymmetry in the MSSP risk score growth cap. May 10, 2022. available at https://us.milliman.com/en/insight/evaluating-the-financial-cost-of-the-asymmetry-in-the-mssp-risk-score-growth-cap .

Response: As described in section III.G.5.e.(2) of the proposed rule, in developing our proposed policy we declined to consider an approach that would impose a direct cap on risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area, as requested by some commenters, as we are concerned that such an approach would create adverse incentives for coding behavior, especially for ACOs that are highly penetrated in their regional service areas. Currently, ACOs that are highly penetrated in their regional service area have a disincentive to engage in coding initiatives, as it could increase risk score growth in their regional service area and potentially decrease the value of the regional component of their update factor. Capping risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area could remove this disincentive and encourage ACOs to engage in coding initiatives.

We also noted in section III.G.5.e.(2) of the proposed rule that we did not consider an approach under which we would account for the difference between the 3 percent cap and risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area in combination with applying a cap on risk score growth in aggregate across Medicare enrollment types (with or without first accounting for changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year). As we explained in the proposed rule, we view these two approaches to be inconsistent with each other, as one approach allows an ACO's risk score growth to rise above 3 percent based on risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area, whereas the other would retain the 3 percent cap, but apply it at the aggregate level. We also noted that we still have concerns that allowing the cap on an ACO's risk score growth to increase with regional risk score growth could incentivize ACOs, particularly those highly penetrated in their regional service areas, to engage in coding behavior that would increase their cap, even if this incentive would be mitigated to some degree by limiting the allowable increase in the cap based on the ACO's market share. We also noted our belief that the proposed methodology would avoid this undesired incentive while still accounting for changes in health risk for an ACO's assigned beneficiary population to a greater extent than the current policy and would also help to address cases where regional risk score growth stems from volatility due to the small number of assignable beneficiaries in a particular enrollment type or shifting demographics within a regional service area.

In section III.G.5.e.(2) of the proposed rule, we stated that a relatively small share of ACOs affected by the existing 3 percent cap on risk score growth operated in regional service areas where regional risk score growth was greater than 3 percent. Since then, we have done additional analysis. Using PY 2020 data for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, we found that sixteen percent of ACOs were operating in a region where the regional risk ratio was above 1.03 for at least one enrollment type and 4 percent were operating in a region where the weighted average regional risk ratio was above 1.03. 355 Using PY 2021 data, 31 percent of ACOs were operating in a region where the regional risk ratio was above 1.03 for at least one enrollment type and 11 percent were operating in a region where the weighted average regional risk ratio was above 1.03. Reviewing this more recent data, we continue to believe a relatively small share of ACOs operate in regional service areas where regional risk score growth is greater than 3 percent, but we will continue to monitor the impacts of regional risk score growth and may propose further refinements to our risk adjustment policies in future rulemaking.

355 For purposes of this analysis, we estimated regional risk scores for the performance year and BY3 by dividing non-risk adjusted regional expenditures for each enrollment type by risk-adjusted regional expenditures for that enrollment type.

As noted previously in this section of this final rule, the modeling conducted during the development of the proposed policy suggests that a majority of ACOs that operate in regions with risk score growth in excess of 3 percent for at least one Medicare enrollment type would have had a higher updated benchmark under the proposed policy than the current policy. This continues to be true in our modeling using PY 2021 data. In addition, we believe that our decision to finalize the proposal to incorporate a prospective, external factor in the growth rates used to update the historical benchmark (see section III.G.5.c.(3) of this final rule) will further help to mitigate concerns raised by some commenters about the impacts of regional risk score growth, by decreasing the weight placed on the two-way blend of national and regional growth rates when updating an ACO's historical benchmark for each performance year in the ACO's agreement period.

Comment: A few commenters urged CMS to allow ACOs that are in the middle of an agreement period on January 1, 2024, the flexibility to opt into this proposed policy without having to early renew. One commenter described the early renewal process as being onerous. Another asked that, where possible, this policy should apply to all currently participating ACOs with earlier agreement period start dates (such as, agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2023, and earlier).

Response: We decline the commenters' suggestion and are finalizing our proposal to apply the changes to the risk adjustment methodology on an agreement period basis. The revisions we are making in this final rule to the risk adjustment methodology will apply to ACOs entering a new agreement period beginning on or after January 1, 2024. Elsewhere in section III.G.5 of the final rule, we explain our concerns with an approach to applying benchmarking changes to ACOs within an agreement period in responding to similar suggestions. Among other reasons, such an approach would introduce considerable operational complexity into the program's benchmarking methodology, particularly as the revised risk adjustment methodology is one of a package of changes, we are finalizing to the benchmarking methodology to be applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

We recognize that currently participating ACOs that entered an agreement period prior to January 1, 2024, may wish to pursue the option to early renew for a new agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, by terminating their current agreement and immediately entering a new agreement period, so that they would have the opportunity to participate under the revised benchmarking methodology. (Refer to paragraph (2) of the definition of “renewing ACO” in § 425.20, and the application procedures set forth in § 425.224.) We note that early renewal, like renewing upon completion of an agreement period, will result in rebasing of the ACO's historical benchmark, and will affect the ACO's eligibility for certain participation options (refer to section III.G.2. of this final rule), as well as the agreement period the ACO is entering for purposes of applying program requirements that phase-in over multiple agreement periods (refer to § 425.600(f)).

Comment: MedPAC recommended that CMS address the underlying incentives for coding initiatives and the accuracy of risk adjustment before considering any policy that would increase the risk score growth cap (such as the proposed policy), repeating their comment on the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule summarized in the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65304). MedPAC also recommended that CMS use 2 years of diagnostic data for risk adjustment as permitted under the 21st Century Cures Act, which they believe would improve the accuracy of coefficients estimated with FFS data and reduce year-to-year variation in beneficiary risk scores, along with reducing the administrative burden for ACO participants related to HCC documentation. MedPAC further suggested that CMS should only consider changes to the 3 percent cap after making this suggested change and after observing the effect of the phase-in from 2020 to 2022 of the Alternative Payment Condition Count (APCC) CMS-HCC risk adjustment model, which they noted was designed to improve the accuracy of risk adjustment for high-spending beneficiaries. In addition, MedPAC also advocated for the approach outlined in the Commission's June 2022 report to the Congress that would limit the effect of outliers (that is, beneficiaries with the largest underpredictions and overpredictions in spending) on risk score coefficients. MedPAC relayed that the Commission's analysis showed that this change would improve the accuracy of predicted spending under the risk-adjustment model, especially for medically complex beneficiaries. MedPAC stated that until CMS is willing to consider underlying changes that directly affect coding incentives or provides an empirical justification for a 3 percent allowance for coding changes (after allowing demographic risk score changes), the agency should consider applying a uniform coding adjustment across all ACOs to offset the increases to benchmarks via coding increases. This adjustment would protect the Medicare program from subsidies given to ACOs for their coding efforts. MedPAC urged that to the extent that CMS considers any additional coding allowance in the future (including for regional changes in risk scores), CMS should apply an adjustment that ensures the average increase in risk scores across all ACOs is no greater than the average increase in risk scores for the assignable population. To mitigate coding initiatives, they suggested that CMS could group ACOs into categories of high, medium, and low coding intensity and then apply a coding intensity adjustment based on the average level of coding intensity for each group (similar to an option the Commission discussed in its March 2017 report to the Congress).

Response: We appreciate MedPAC's suggestions, and we believe our current risk adjustment methodology which renormalizes risk scores for each enrollment type based on a national assignable FFS population, and our proposed changes to apply the 3 percent cap after accounting for demographic risk score changes address many of the concerns raised by MedPAC. However, CMS will continue to monitor how the risk adjustment model is used in the Shared Savings Program and the impact of the policies finalized in this rule and may propose further changes or refinements in future rulemaking. We also note that many of these suggestions go beyond the scope of the modifications we proposed to the program's risk adjustment methodology.

Comment: A few commenters offered two recommendations for CMS: (1) removing dually eligible beneficiaries from the risk adjustment calculation and limiting it to non-dually eligible beneficiaries; and (2) adding ESRD patients to this calculation. These commenters explained that they wanted the dually eligible beneficiaries removed because the cost of care required for these beneficiaries is much greater and would not be addressed by the proposed modifications to risk adjustment methodology. These commenters also noted that adding ESRD patients would account for high-cost beneficiaries more accurately.

Response: We believe these comments could be interpreted in multiple ways and would require additional clarity before we could consider implementing the commenters' suggestions. However, we note that for the reasons discussed previously in this section, we believe the proposed modifications to the risk adjustment methodology, which we are adopting in this final rule, will make it less likely that the aged/dual eligible enrollment type is capped. Regarding the commenters' second request, we clarify that beneficiaries in the ESRD enrollment type are included in risk adjustment calculations using the separate CMS ESRD risk adjustment model.

Comment: One commenter indicated their support for the alternative option, also referred to as the second option, to apply an aggregate cap without first accounting for changes to demographic risk scores. This commenter stated that they were “very pleased” with CMS' proposal to apply the 3 percent cap in aggregate across the four Medicare enrollment types, which they stated would allow ACOs that care for larger populations of beneficiaries in the ESRD, disabled, and aged/dual enrollment types to receive higher benchmarks than under the current risk adjustment methodology. However, this commenter urged CMS to reconsider its proposal to move forward with a methodology that would first account for demographic risk changes prior to applying the 3 percent cap on risk score, particularly for ACOs serving populations with a high rate of death. This commenter explained that they are an ACO that serves many high-risk beneficiaries at the end of life, as measured by a high death rate in their long-term institutionalized (LTI) population, and are concerned that churn in their assigned beneficiary population, which causes fluctuations in their annual demographic score, would result in unintended year-to-year changes in their aggregate risk score cap, creating significant annual instability for their ACO. This commenter asked that at a minimum, CMS use the higher of the proposed policy or this alternative option when calculating the risk score cap for each ACO to avoid unforeseen and negative consequences to ACOs with a large proportion of high-risk beneficiaries.

Response: We decline to finalize the alternative option of applying the 3 percent cap in aggregate across the four Medicare enrollment types (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible) without first accounting for changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year. We also decline the commenter's suggestion that we use the higher of the proposed policy or this alternative option.

As noted earlier in this section and in section III.G.5.e.(2) of the proposed rule, based on our modeling of the proposed policy, we believe that a significant share of ACOs, especially those with increases in health risk as measured by demographic risk ratios, would either be unaffected by or benefit from the proposed policy, while a small share would do worse, likely reflecting decreases in health risk for their assigned beneficiary population as measured by reductions in demographic risk ratios.

Additionally, as noted in section III.G.5.e.(2) of the proposed rule, while one advantage of this alternative option of applying the cap on risk score growth in aggregate across Medicare enrollment types, without first accounting for changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year over the proposed approach is that no ACOs would receive a lower updated benchmark, according to our simulations using PY 2020 financial reconciliation data from ACOs this alternative approach would, in aggregate, be less advantageous to ACOs than the proposed approach. This remains true in our simulations using PY 2021 financial reconciliation data.

Comment: Several commenters urged CMS to standardize the risk adjustment methodology it uses, with some commenters asking for standardization across all Medicare programs and models and others focusing on standardization across the Shared Savings Program and MA. Some of these commenters asked CMS to limit MA risk score growth and others asked that we allow ACO risk scores to grow the same way they do in MA plans. Several of these commenters discussed differences in the limits on coding intensity between MA and the Shared Savings Program, with many commenters indicating that more risk score growth is allowed in the MA program than in the Shared Savings Program.

One commenter argued that CMS should take steps to limit MA risk score growth, and if that cannot be done, should pursue a policy of bringing the risk score methodology for the two programs into parity. The commenter noted that if this issue is not resolved, it is likely that providers and suppliers will continue their movement out of ACOs and into the “much more lucrative” MA program. Another commenter argued that eliminating the cap on ACO risk score growth and replacing it with the MA coding intensity adjustment would be the best way to bring parity between the two programs. Other commenters stated that, at a minimum, CMS should align the methodology used in the ENHANCED track of the Shared Savings Program with MA, since currently providers and suppliers have different incentives under the two programs which lead to inconsistent coding practices. One commenter stated that CMS should consider leveling the Medicare risk adjustment (MRA) playing field between MA plans and ACOs because it will increase ACO participation by providers and suppliers and propel participation in value-based care models by 2030. This commenter noted that most of their providers and suppliers participate in multiple MA plans that have established oversight and internal audits into MRA coding, and typically use the same care parameters for both FFS and MA plans. However, their participants are frustrated by the different methodologies for risk score normalization and determining risk adjustments and the different impacts on payments under MA and the Shared Savings Program. One commenter also urged CMS to reduce the opportunity for either ACOs or MA plans to increase their risk scores through coding initiatives in order to reduce the resources wasted in this area. However, this commenter noted that, contrary to CMS' assertion in the proposed rule, allowing for more aggressive coding initiatives by ACOs probably would not increase costs to the Federal government because it would reduce the difference in coding intensity between traditional Medicare and MA, which would potentially reduce payments to MA plans which would offset the cost of these more aggressive coding initiatives by ACOs. Several commenters that requested a cap on downward risk score growth noted that a cap on downward adjustments would help ACOs to compete with MA plans. Another commenter encouraged CMS to explore ways to implement the CMS Innovation Center HCC concurrent risk adjustment model in the Shared Savings Program. They explained that concurrent risk models are better able to predict costs for populations with high-disease burden or who are otherwise seriously ill, because the approach can better capture a rapid deterioration in health in the current year, such as through the occurrence of acute episodes that are difficult to predict or prevent (for example, heart attack). In contrast, they explained that the existing CMS-HCC prospective risk adjustment model predicts current-year costs using health status indicators (diagnoses) from the prior year.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' suggestions but note that these suggestions go beyond the scope of modifications we proposed to the program's risk adjustment methodology.

Comment: A couple of commenters requested that CMS change the risk adjustment methodology across all Medicare models by: updating the HCC Model to use ICD-10 codes; refining HCC diagnoses; and incorporating a social determinants of health (SDOH) component into the HCC severity calculations. In regard to the use of ICD-10 codes, one of the commenters explained that the current methodology is based on ICD-9 codes, which have been largely phased out under the Medicare payment systems in favor of ICD-10 codes. The commenter stated that ICD-10 codes allow for multiple clinical concepts, offering more specificity than ICD-9 codes.

Another commenter stated that the current Shared Savings Program risk adjustment policy could be improved further by incorporating sociodemographic factors such as food insecurity, homelessness, and other factors. The commenter explained that SDOH are widely recognized as important predictors in clinical care, noting that the American Medical Association (AMA) has recognized the importance of SDOH in the medical decision-making component used in the assignment of evaluation and management code level. That commenter stated that incorporating SDOH disease interactions would provide a mechanism to encourage the collection of information on SDOH without incentivizing coding initiatives for financial improvement and should be used to appropriately capture the impact of SDOH on patient severity reporting.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' suggestions but note that these suggestions go beyond the scope of the proposed modifications to the Shared Savings Program's risk adjustment methodology. We will monitor the impacts of the combination of Shared Savings Program policies that we are finalizing in this rule, and as we gain experience with the updated risk adjustment methodology, we will continue to consider these recommendations to help inform future rulemaking.

After consideration of the public comments, we are finalizing the proposed modifications to the risk adjustment methodology to account for all changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year prior to applying the 3 percent cap on positive adjustments resulting from changes in prospective HCC risk scores, and to apply the cap in aggregate across the four Medicare enrollment types (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible), with one modification to correct an error in the description of the methodology for calculating of the weighted average demographic and prospective HCC risk scores in the proposed rule.

As described earlier in this section of this final rule, in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule we proposed to calculate the weighted average demographic risk ratio across the four Medicare enrollment types, where the weight applied to the demographic risk ratio for each enrollment type would be equal to historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type divided by the sum of historical benchmark expenditures across all enrollment types. We indicated that the historical benchmark expenditures for each enrollment type would be calculated as per capita historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type multiplied by the ACO's BY3 assigned beneficiary person years for that enrollment type. We also indicated that those same weights would be applied to the prospective HCC risk ratios for each of the four Medicare enrollment types in the calculation of the weighted average prospective HCC risk ratio. We need to correct the description of the weights applied to the risk ratios for each of the four Medicare enrollment types when calculating the weighted average demographic risk ratio and the prospective HCC risk ratio. The weights applied will be equal to the per capita historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type multiplied by the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary person years for that enrollment type (not multiplied by the ACO's BY3 assigned beneficiary person years for that enrollment type as previously erroneously stated). This error was typographical. The correct weights were used in determining the weighted average prospective HCC and demographic risk ratios in the simulations discussed earlier in this section of this final rule, whose results are shown in Tables 78 and 79. Additionally, we believe that weighting prospective HCC and demographic risk ratios for each enrollment type by both per capita historical benchmark expenditures and performance year person years for each enrollment type is warranted when calculating weighted average prospective HCC and demographic risk ratios because of the assumption that growth in expenditures is proportional to growth in risk scores. We also note that, while in the proposed rule and earlier in this section of the final rule we used the term “dollar-weighted average” when describing the weighted average prospective HCC and demographic risk scores, we have elected to no longer use this terminology as the weights used in the weighted averages are not just per capita historical benchmark expenditures (or “dollars”) but also performance year person years.

We are finalizing the proposed revisions to the regulations at § 425.605(a)(1) and § 425.610(a)(2) with modifications to incorporate the aforementioned correction to the methodology for determining the aggregate weighted average growth in demographic risk scores and the aggregate weighted average growth in prospective HCC risk scores, and to no longer use the term “dollar-weighted”. Accordingly, we have revised the language in §§ 425.605(a)(1)(ii)(C) and 425.610(a)(2)(ii)(C). In addition, the proposed provisions at §§ 425.605(a)(1)(ii)(C)( 1 ) and ( 2), and 425.610(a)(2)(ii)(C)( 1) and ( 2 ) have been removed as they are no longer needed in light of the revisions to §§ 425.605(a)(1)(ii)(C) and 425.610(a)(2)(ii)(C). The resulting final regulation text accurately describes the weights used when calculating the weighted average growth in demographic risk scores or prospective HCC risk scores. Specifically, the final regulation text now states that when calculating the weighted average growth in demographic risk scores or prospective HCC risk scores, as applicable, the weight applied to the growth in risk scores (expressed as a ratio of the ACO's performance year risk score to the ACO's BY3 risk score) for each Medicare enrollment type is equal to the product of the historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type and the performance year person years for that enrollment type.

f. Increased Opportunities for Low Revenue ACOs to Share in Savings

(1) Background

In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67927 through 67929), we explained that a goal of the Shared Savings Program is to use a portion of the savings (the difference between the ACO's actual expenditures and the benchmark) to encourage and reward participating ACOs for coordinating the care for an assigned beneficiary population in a way that controls the growth in Medicare expenditures for that patient population while also meeting the established quality performance standards. However, we also acknowledged that observed savings can also occur as a result of normal year-to-year variations in Medicare beneficiaries' claims expenditures in addition to the ACO's activities. Thus, even if an ACO engages in no activities to improve the quality and efficiency of the services it delivers, in certain cases, differences between the benchmark expenditures and assigned patients' expenditures would be observed during some performance periods merely because of such normal variation. Consequently, section 1899(d)(1)(B)(i) of the Act requires us to specify an MSR to account for the normal variation in expenditures, based upon the number of Medicare FFS beneficiaries assigned to the ACO. As we stated in the November 2011 final rule, the MSR should be set in a way that gives us some assurance that the ACO's performance is a result of its interventions, not normal variation in expenditures. However, we also do not want an outcome where savings that have been earned are not recognized.

Establishing an MSR on the basis of standard inferential statistics that take into account the size of an ACO's beneficiary population provides confidence that, once the savings achieved by the ACO exceed the MSR, the change in expenditures represents actual performance improvements by the ACO as opposed to normal variations. There are several policy implications associated with the methodology used to set the MSR. A higher MSR would provide greater confidence that the shared savings amounts reflect real quality and efficiency gains and offer greater protection to the Medicare Trust Funds. However, due to the larger barrier to achieving savings, a higher MSR could also discourage potentially successful ACOs, especially physician-organized ACOs and smaller ACOs in rural areas, from participating in the program. In contrast, a lower MSR would encourage more potential ACOs to participate in the program but would also provide less confidence that shared savings amounts are a result of improvements in quality and efficiency made by an ACO. In the original rulemaking establishing the Shared Savings Program, we stated that we believed that the most appropriate policy concerning determination of the “appropriate percent” for the MSR would achieve a balance between the advantages of making incentives and rewards available to successful ACOs and prudent stewardship of the Medicare Trust Funds. In the November 2011 final rule, we finalized an approach wherein the MSR and MLR are calculated as a percentage of the ACO's updated historical benchmark (see §§ 425.604(b) (Track 1), 425.606(b) (Track 2)).

In the June 2015 final rule, we finalized an approach to offer Track 2 ACOs and ACOs in the new Track 3 (subsequently renamed the ENHANCED track) the opportunity to select the MSR/MLR that will apply for the duration of the ACO's 3-year agreement period from several symmetrical MSR/MLR options (80 FR 32769 through 32771, and 80 FR 32779 and 32780; §§ 425.606(b)(1)(ii) and 425.610(b)(1)). We explained our belief that offering ACOs a choice of MSR/MLR will encourage ACOs to move to two-sided risk, and that ACOs are best positioned to determine the level of risk they are prepared to accept. For instance, ACOs that are more hesitant to enter a performance-based risk arrangement may choose a higher MSR/MLR, to have the protection of a higher threshold before the ACO would become liable to repay shared losses, thus mitigating downside risk, although the ACO would in turn be required to meet a higher threshold before being eligible to receive shared savings. ACOs that are comfortable with a lower threshold of protection from risk of shared losses may select a lower MSR/MLR to benefit from a corresponding lower threshold for eligibility for shared savings. We also explained our belief that applying the same MSR/MLR methodology in both of the risk-based tracks reduces complexity for CMS' operations and establishes more equal footing between the risk models. ACOs participating in the Track 1+ Model were also allowed the same choice of MSR/MLR to be applied for the duration of the ACO's agreement period under the Track 1+ Model. 356

356 Refer to the Medicare ACO Track 1+ Model Participation Agreement, section V, available at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/sharedsavingsprogram/Downloads/track-1plus-model-par-agreement.pdf .

ACOs applying to a two-sided model (Track 2, Track 3 or the Track 1+ Model) could select from the following options:

• Zero percent MSR/MLR.

• Symmetrical MSR/MLR in a 0.5 percent increment between 0.5-2.0 percent.

• Symmetrical MSR/MLR that varies based on the ACO's number of assigned beneficiaries according to the methodology established under § 425.604(b) for Track 1. The MSR is the same as the MSR that would apply in the one-sided model, and the MLR is equal to the negative MSR.

In the December 2018 final rule, we finalized policies governing the MSR/MLR for ACOs in the BASIC track at § 425.605(b). Under the final policies, ACOs in a one-sided model of the BASIC track's glide path have a variable MSR based on the number of beneficiaries assigned to the ACO (§ 425.605(b)(1)). The variable MSR (ranging from 3.9 percent for ACOs with 5,000 assigned beneficiaries to 2.0 percent for ACOs with 60,000 or more assigned beneficiaries) is determined using the same methodology that was used for Track 1. ACOs in a two-sided model of the BASIC track are able to choose among the MSR/MLR options that are available to ACOs in the ENHANCED track. ACOs participating under Level A or B of the BASIC track's glide path will choose an MSR/MLR, ranging from zero to 2 percent (in 0.5 percent increments), or that is variable based on number of beneficiaries assigned to the ACO, before the start of their first performance year in a two-sided model (§ 425.605(b)(2)(i)). This selection will occur before the ACO enters Level C, D or E of the BASIC track's glide path, depending on whether the ACO is automatically transitioned to a two-sided model (Level C or E) or elects to more quickly transition to a two-sided model within the glide path (Level C, D, or E), and will be in effect for the duration of the agreement period that the ACO is under two-sided risk (§ 425.605(b)(2)(ii)).

In addition to the MSR/MLR, we also use an ACO's quality score as part of the determination of eligibility for and calculation of shared savings and shared losses. In the CY 2021 PFS final rule, we adopted a new regulation at § 425.512(a) to reflect the new quality performance requirements under the Shared Savings Program for PY 2021 and subsequent performance years. For performance years beginning on January 1, 2021, and subsequent performance years, if the ACO meets the quality performance standard established under § 425.512, the ACO will share in savings at the maximum sharing rate based on the ACO's track/level of participation (refer to Table 80). The final sharing rate is applied to an ACO's savings on a first dollar basis up to the applicable performance payment limit, expressed as a percentage of the ACO's updated benchmark.

As discussed in the November 2011 final rule and during subsequent rulemaking cycles, we have received comments from ACOs and other interested parties expressing concerns regarding the MSR/MLR methodology and proposing revisions. Commenters responding to the April 2011 proposed rule 357 expressed concern that the proposed (and later finalized) methodology for establishing the MSR on a sliding scale based on population size would disadvantage smaller ACOs, including ACOs likely to form in rural areas and those largely comprised of small- and medium-sized physician practices, and discourage their participation by setting too high a bar on shared savings (76 FR 67928 and 67929). Some commenters considered the potential long-term consequences of this dynamic, indicating it could ultimately result in diminished provider competition in some markets or stifle the development of innovative care coordination strategies. Further, as other commenters indicated, smaller ACOs are likely to be in greatest need of additional capital to support start-up and operational expenses. Some commenters suggested that the MSRs that apply to smaller ACOs based on their number of assigned beneficiaries may make it impossible for these ACOs to ever share in savings.

357 The proposed rule proposing the establishment of the Shared Savings Program entitled “Medicare Program; Medicare Shared Savings Program: Accountable Care Organizations” appeared in the April 7, 2011 Federal Register (76 FR 19528) (herein referred to as the “April 2011 proposed rule”).

Additionally, a number of commenters offered that other proposed policies under the Shared Savings Program, including, for example, the rigorous quality performance standards and the requirement that all ACOs ultimately accept downside performance risk, are sufficient to ensure savings are a result of actions by ACOs and obviate the need for an MSR. One commenter suggested a blended approach such that if an ACO exceeds the 2 percent MSR, it would be eligible for a lower sharing rate, but would not receive the full sharing rate unless it exceeded its statistically adjusted MSR.

In the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 67924 through 67928), we summarized commenters' responses to the proposals described in August 2018 proposed rule related to the MSR and MLR. One commenter asked that CMS reconsider its proposals in order to “lessen restrictions and remove barriers to participation in risk sharing arrangements,” but did not specify which aspects of the MSR/MLR proposals they believed to be restrictive or to create barriers. A number of commenters supported a combination of a lower MSR and higher sharing rates for low revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track and offered several different alternatives. Commenters explained that combining a lower MSR and higher final sharing rate was necessary to ensure there are sufficient and attainable incentives to support ACOs' efforts to improve quality and lower cost, to provide early returns on investments, as well as predictability of savings and the financial support ACOs need to ensure successful participation, and to incentivize low revenue and physician‐led ACOs to participate in the redesigned participation options under the Shared Savings Program.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we stated that while it remains important to ensure performance payments are not based on normal expenditure fluctuations, we believe modification to our MSR policy would provide payments to ACOs with the greatest need for shared savings, in particular smaller, rural ACOs which tend to be less capitalized, allowing for investments in care redesign and quality improvement activities. We indicated that this modification would also align with the other changes we were proposing to the participation options and financial methodologies under the Shared Savings Program to encourage participation by new ACOs and ACOs that focus on underserved populations, such as the proposal to offer AIPs to new low revenue ACOs joining the BASIC track as described in section III.G.2. of the proposed rule.

(2) Revisions

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we proposed to use our authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act, for the use of other payment models, to expand the eligibility criteria to qualify for shared savings to enable certain low revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track to share in savings even if the ACO does not meet the MSR as required under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(i) of the Act. Specifically, as described in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46196 through 46198), we proposed to modify the relevant provisions of § 425.605 to specify that ACOs participating in the BASIC track that do not meet the MSR requirement, but that do meet the quality performance standard or the proposed alternative quality performance standard under § 425.512 and otherwise maintain eligibility to participate in the Shared Savings Program, would qualify for a shared savings payment if the following criteria are met:

• The ACO has average per capita Medicare Parts A and B FFS expenditures below the updated benchmark.

• The ACO is a low revenue ACO as defined in § 425.20 at the time of financial reconciliation for the relevant performance year.

• The ACO has at least 5,000 assigned beneficiaries at the time of financial reconciliation for the relevant performance year.

Eligible ACOs that meet the quality performance standard required to share in savings at the maximum sharing rate would receive half of the maximum sharing rate for their level of participation (20 percent instead of 40 percent under Levels A and B, and 25 percent instead of 50 percent under Levels C, D, and E). For eligible ACOs that do not meet the quality performance standard required to share in savings at the maximum sharing rate but meet the proposed alternative quality performance standard, the sharing rate would be further adjusted according to the proposal outlined in section III.G.4.b. of the proposed rule (87 FR 46129 and 46130), which would reinstate a sliding scale approach for determining shared savings. This calculation would use an ACO's quality performance score, which would reflect the inclusion of health equity adjustment bonus points as described in section III.G.4.b.(7) of the proposed rule. A numerical example of the proposed modification to BASIC Track sharing rates for eligible ACOs is provided in Table 81.

As proposed, this approach would apply to low revenue ACOs entering an agreement period in the BASIC track beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. High revenue ACOs in the BASIC track, ACOs below 5,000 assigned beneficiaries at the time of financial reconciliation, and ACOs in the ENHANCED track would not be eligible for this option. We proposed that this policy would apply to all ACOs meeting the criteria, including new, renewing, and re-entering ACOs, in order to provide incentives both for new ACOs to join the Shared Savings Program and for existing ACOs to remain in the program. We noted that this differed from the proposed eligibility criteria for AIPs outlined in section III.G.2.a.(2) of the proposed rule (87 FR 46099 and 46100), which we proposed to limit to ACOs that are new to the Shared Savings Program with the intent of lowering barriers to entry. Although as described in section III.G.2.b.(2) of the proposed rule (87 FR 46114 through 46119) we proposed to revise our regulations to permit all otherwise eligible ACOs that are inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives to elect to participate in one, 5-year agreement period under a one-sided model of the BASIC track's glide path regardless of revenue status, we explained our belief that it would be appropriate to limit this proposed policy change to the low revenue ACOs in the BASIC track in order to direct the payments to ACOs with the greatest need for capital, in particular smaller, rural ACOs which tend to be less capitalized, allowing for investments in care redesign and quality improvement activities. As discussed in the proposed rule, we did not believe it would be necessary or appropriate to extend this opportunity to high revenue ACOs as these ACOs, which tend to include institutional providers and are typically larger and better capitalized, have the potential to exert more influence, direction, and coordination over the full continuum of care, and thus have a greater potential to achieve the level of savings necessary to meet the MSR. Rather, we stated our belief that by retaining the requirement that high revenue ACOs meet or exceed their MSR, we would drive more meaningful systematic change by the ACOs that have the greatest potential to achieve significant change in spending. Furthermore, we noted that our proposal to exclude ACOs with fewer than 5,000 assigned beneficiaries at the time of financial reconciliation would align with the requirement under section 1899(b)(2)(D) of the Act and § 425.110 that an ACO have at least 5,000 assigned beneficiaries and guard against the heightened risk—absent an MSR—that any savings are the result of random variation.

We simulated the impact of the proposal using financial reconciliation data from PYs 2020, 2019, and 2019A. 358 There were 80, 109, and 60 positive within corridor ACOs (that is, ACOs that had performance year expenditures below benchmark expenditures but did not meet the MSR and did not receive shared savings payments) in each year, respectively. Of these positive within corridor ACOs, 35 ACOs in 2020 and 2019, and 18 ACOs in 2019A would have met the criteria described in this section and received a shared savings payment under our proposed policy change. On average, the positive within corridor ACOs that would benefit from the proposed policy change were smaller (had fewer assigned beneficiaries) in all 3 performance years and a larger share of these ACOs were classified as rural in PYs 2020 and 2019. 359 In the proposed rule, we stated our belief that by offering additional opportunities for low revenue ACOs to share in savings, the proposed approach could increase participation in the Shared Savings Program by providing an incentive for new ACOs to join the program and for existing ACOs to remain in the program. In addition, the proposal would enable low revenue ACOs, which are most in need of additional capital, to make investments in care redesign and quality improvement activities and would also recognize incremental improvements in care by ACOs that receive AIPs.

358 PY 2019 refers to both the 12-month performance year from January 1, 2019 through December 31, 2019 and the 6-month performance year from January 1, 2019 through June 30, 2019. PY 2019A refers to the 6-month performance year from July 2, 2019 through December 31, 2019.

359 For this analysis, ACOs were classified as rural if the plurality of their assigned beneficiaries resided in either micropolitan or noncore counties as defined by The United States Census Bureau and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).

Additional analysis completed after the publication of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule upon the availability of PY 2021 financial reconciliation data yielded consistent results. Of the 111 positive within corridor ACOs in PY 2021, 33 would have been eligible for partial shared savings under this policy. Unlike in previous PYs, none of the positive within corridor ACOs in PY 2021 that would have been eligible for partial shared savings under this policy were classified as rural, but they did, on average, have fewer assigned beneficiaries than ineligible ACOs.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we acknowledged that to exercise our authority under section 1899(i) of the Act, we must determine that a payment model under which certain low revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track may qualify for shared savings payments even when the MSR as required under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(i) of the Act is not met, will improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare program, and that program expenditures under the alternative methodology would be equal to or lower than those that would result under the statutory payment model. By supporting expanded and sustained participation by ACOs in the Shared Savings Program, we noted our belief that the proposed approach would allow for lower growth in Medicare FFS expenditures. We also believed the proposed approach would lead to improvement in the quality of care furnished to Medicare FFS beneficiaries because participating ACOs would have an incentive to perform well on quality measures in order to maximize the shared savings they may receive. Further, the proposed approach would provide additional capital to enable low revenue ACOs to make investments in care redesign and quality improvement activities, potentially leading to improvements in the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to Medicare FFS beneficiaries. We also stated our belief that the proposal, along with many of the other proposals in the proposed rule, would expand participation among ACOs serving higher cost beneficiaries for whom the savings potential is greater (relative to ACOs serving lower cost beneficiaries that may already find the current regional adjustment methodology an adequate incentive to participate in the program), and among low revenue ACOs, which have historically performed well in the program. For example, in PY 2018, about 49 percent of low revenue Shared Savings Program ACOs shared in savings compared to 28 percent of high revenue ACOs. These proportions were 63 percent and 40 percent in PY 2019, 69 percent and 40 percent in PY 2019-A, and 75 percent and 59 percent in PY 2020. 360 361 Lastly, we noted that as discussed in the Regulatory Impact Analysis of the proposed rule (87 FR 46381)), the proposed change was not expected to result in a situation in which all policies adopted under the authority of section 1899(i) of the Act, when taken together, result in more spending under the program than would have resulted under the statutory payment methodology in section 1899(d) of the Act.

360 Refer to Data.CMS.gov, Performance Year Financial and Quality Results, available at https://data.cms.gov/medicare-shared-savings-program/performance-year-financial-and-quality-results/data . 361 For PY 2021, 69 percent of low revenue Shared Savings Program ACOs shared in savings compared to 46 percent of high revenue ACOs, based on analysis of PY 2021 financial reconciliation data completed after the publication of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule.

We proposed to amend the regulation at § 425.605, which governs calculation of shared savings and shared losses under the BASIC track, to specify an exception to the MSR requirement for eligible ACOs participating in an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, in a new provision at § 425.605(h). We also proposed modifications to the provisions in § 425.605(d)(1) specifying the calculation of the final sharing rate for the different levels of the BASIC track. Further, we proposed conforming changes to §§ 425.100(b)(1), 425.605(a), 425.605(b)(3), and 425.605(c)(2) to reflect this exception to the MSR requirement.

We sought comment on the proposal to expand the criteria ACOs can meet to qualify for shared savings under the BASIC track. The following is a summary of the public comments received on this proposal and our responses:

Comment: We received several comments in support of this proposal, citing the potential for ACOs to invest the savings earned under this policy in care redesign and quality improvement activities.

Many commenters provided additional reasons for their support of the proposed policy. Two commenters described how this policy could impact new ACOs, citing the time it takes for new ACOs to generate savings with one explaining how increased beneficiary engagement and uptake of preventive services may increase short-term spending. A few commenters noted the policy's potential to increase participation, with two explaining that savings earned under this policy could be used by ACOs to cover infrastructure costs, allowing them to continue participating in the program. Another commenter stated the benefits of this policy for physician-led ACOs, explaining that it would help them improve care and remain in the ACO program. A few commenters noted the proposed policy's potential to support ACOs with the largest need for shared savings, including small rural ACOs, independent primary care practices, and those serving underserved patient populations.

One commenter argued that the existing MSR is harmful to low revenue ACOs and agreed that this policy could encourage participation in the program, but they urged CMS to ensure that the low revenue standard is not gamed in such a manner that some ACOs qualify only through technicalities and are able to take undue advantage of any final policy.

A few commenters noted the value of the policy beyond the financial benefits. One commenter supported this proposal citing personal experience with missing the MSR requirement by a marginal amount. They understand the actuarial benefits of an MSR, but do not believe a strict cutoff makes for a good policy. They stated that the shared savings earned under this policy may have little impact on an ACO's operating costs but would provide valuable motivation for program participants. Another commenter had a similar sentiment, stating that ACOs could miss out on shared savings by just a fraction of a percent, which is discouraging and could affect participation. Another commenter endorsed the proposal, noting that the amount of shared savings may not be sufficient to sustain ACO participation, but that it would help continuous investment in care management strategies and personnel, particularly if an ACO's eligibility to receive AIP payments has expired.

Response: We thank commenters for their support of the proposal to increase opportunities for eligible low revenue ACOs to share in savings by. We agree that this policy under which eligible low revenue ACOs may receive up to half of the maximum sharing rate for their level of participation will help bolster participation among both new and reentering ACOs, particularly those with the greatest need for shared savings, by allowing for investment in care improvement, covering infrastructure costs, and providing motivation for ACOs that generate savings but have not met the MSR requirement. However, we also believe it remains important to ensure shared savings payments are not based on normal expenditure fluctuations, and we believe that meeting the MSR should remain a necessary requirement for an ACO to receive shared savings based on the maximum sharing rate under their track.

Comment: We received one comment opposed to this proposal. The commenter expressed their belief that ACOs should meet the MSR to share in savings, stating that the MSR is necessary to protect the Trust Fund from making payments based solely on random variation, and that the performance of smaller ACOs may be driven by random variation even under the current MSR requirements. They also noted that this proposed policy is focused on low revenue ACOs, but 56 percent of Shared Savings Program ACOs are currently classified as low revenue. Moreover, they believe that the ACOs that would benefit from this policy would be those that already benefit from selection against high spending, medically complex, and underserved populations through positive regional adjustments to their benchmarks. The commenter supported more direct methods for increasing program participation and noted that there were several other proposals for the Shared Savings Program in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule that could accomplish this.

Response: By supporting expanded and sustained participation by low revenue ACOs in the Shared Savings Program, we believe this proposed approach will allow for lower growth in Medicare FFS expenditures because low revenue ACOs have historically produced higher net per capita savings. As described in the Regulatory Impact Analysis in section VII. for this final rule, a key to generating net savings for the Shared Savings Program is attracting more ACOs into the BASIC track that serve higher spending populations, particularly low revenue physician-led ACOs. Making partial shared savings payments to certain ACOs in the BASIC track with savings below their MSR will only marginally increase payments to ACOs under the Shared Savings Program but is expected to increase the share of new ACOs that are low revenue participating in the Shared Savings Program. Because low revenue ACOs have historically performed well in the program, we expect this to increase overall program savings.

Comment: We received several comments that were generally supportive of the proposal but recommended alternative eligibility criteria.

Several commenters supported the proposed policy but recommended extending the opportunity to share in savings at a reduced rate to all ACOs. Some commenters cited the significant number of ACOs that generate some savings, but not enough to earn shared savings payments, and stated their belief that extending this proposal to all ACOs would help incentivize ACOs to remain in the program. One commenter stated that failing to extend this opportunity to all ACOs would limit the program's attractiveness to healthcare providers given the financial pressures they are currently facing. A couple of commenters argued that high revenue, hospital-led ACOs (like low revenue, physician-led ACOs) often include independent physicians and that they would be more likely to participate in the Shared Savings Program and engage in meaningful transformation if the likelihood of savings increased. One of these commenters noted limiting this opportunity to low revenue ACOs unfairly penalizes physicians for participating in an ACO that includes a hospital system.

One commenter recommended extending the proposed policy to all new ACOs in their first agreement period of the BASIC Track, including ACOs currently participating in their first agreement period in the Shared Savings Program. They argued that the policy as proposed limits the ability of under-resourced ACOs currently participating in their first agreement period to share in partial shared savings until entering a new agreement period, and therefore, limits the expansion of accountable care to patients primarily served by such providers. They stated expanding the eligibility criteria would provide a greater incentive for new providers and suppliers to join ACOs and provide them an onboarding opportunity to invest in the care transformation necessary to generate savings greater than the MSR.

Another commenter urged CMS to expand eligibility for the proposed policy to ACOs in the ENHANCED track. This commenter stated that the policy as proposed could create disincentives for ACOs to enter the ENHANCED track and that the opportunity to share in savings below the MSR may encourage ACOs to take on more risk through the ENHANCED track, leading to ACOs staying in the program longer and generating more savings for the ACO and the Trust Funds.

Response: While we acknowledge that ACOs that do not meet the proposed eligibility criteria could also benefit from increased opportunities to share in savings, we continue to believe it is appropriate to limit this policy to low revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track, as proposed, in order to attract ACOs that serve higher spending populations into the BASIC track, particularly low revenue, physician-led ACOs that have historically performed well in the program. As described in the Regulatory Impact Analysis in section VII. of this final rule, increasing participation among these ACOs is key to generating net savings for the Shared Savings Program. By supporting ACOs with the greatest need for capital, in particular smaller, rural ACOs, which tend to be less capitalized, this policy is expected to increase participation among these ACOs and provide additional support for investments in care redesign and quality improvement activities. With respect to the requests that we expand this policy to ACOs participating in the ENHANCED track, we note that the ENHANCED track was designed for more advanced ACOs prepared for the higher levels of risk and reward. In addition, the higher maximum sharing rate of 75 percent that exists in the ENHANCED track already provides a strong incentive for these ACOs to participate.

Comment: Several commenters who supported the proposal and recommended expanding the eligibility criteria also recommended eliminating the high/low revenue distinction from the Shared Savings Program.

Of the commenters who recommended extending this policy to all ACOs, some expressed belief that the high/low revenue distinction for ACOs is flawed and should be eliminated. One disagreed with the premise that hospital-led (high revenue) ACOs are less efficient than physician-led (low revenue) ACOs and that low revenue ACOs have less ability to control expenditures for beneficiaries. Many commenters noted that the high/low revenue distinction has discouraged partnership with certain types of healthcare providers. Another commenter took issue with the assumption that high revenue ACOs are likely to include hospitals, health systems, and/or other institutional providers and does not believe that whether an ACO treats underserved populations can be determined by the high/low revenue distinction. A couple of commenters suggested that many safety net providers that would most benefit from this opportunity—including RHCs, CAHs, and FQHCs—would likely be designated as high-revenue if they formed an ACO. Another commenter questioned the relevance of the high/low revenue designation to a redesign effort whose stated primary goal is to grow the Shared Savings Program and ensure its sustainability. They argued that the policy would sharply increase support for new, inexperienced, and low revenue participants but would offer few incentives to existing ACOs, especially those that are categorized as renewing, experienced with risk-bearing, or high revenue. They instead suggested that distinctions based on revenue and experience should be replaced with health equity criteria accounting for the needs of an ACO's assigned population and/or its community.

Some commenters who recommended removing the high/low revenue designation only had concerns with the low revenue criterion for this policy and did not comment on other eligibility requirements. One commenter who supported removing the high/low revenue designation argued that high revenue ACOs also contend with multiple financial and operational challenges and would benefit from this proposal. Another commenter suggested that, if CMS does not update the eligibility criteria to include high revenue ACOs, CMS should consider additional incentives to encourage participation of high revenue ACOs.

Response: We disagree with commenters that CMS should remove the revenue distinction from the Shared Savings Program, and therefore, the criteria ACOs must meet to qualify to receive shared savings under the proposed policy. We continue to believe high revenue ACOs have sufficient resources to support continued participation given they are generally composed of hospitals and health systems that have greater access to capital for investing in care redesign, better care coordination, and quality improvement. Furthermore, regarding the concern that safety net providers would be excluded from this opportunity, ACOs that include safety net providers without also including a hospital are overwhelmingly designated as low revenue.

Comment: One commenter supported this proposal but was concerned that the policy would only go into effect for ACOs entering a new agreement period in 2024 or a subsequent year, recommending it be applied to all ACOs, regardless of start year.

Response: We decline the commenter's recommendation that we extend this policy to ACOs in a current agreement period. As described in section III.G.5.a of this final rule, limiting this policy to ACOs entering a new agreement period beginning on or after January 1, 2024, will allow current and new ACOs to decide whether to renew for a new agreement period or join the Shared Savings Program, respectively, and provide sufficient time for CMS to implement these changes.

Comment: Some commenters who supported the proposed policy had additional recommendations related to this proposal. A few commenters recommended that CMS allow ACOs to change their MSR/MLR selection on an annual basis prior to the start of each performance year. These commenters believe that ACOs may be more comfortable with a lower MSR/MLR as they gain experience in the program and should not have to wait until entering a new agreement period to update their selection. They supported the increased flexibility and opportunity this would provide for ACOs in the program. Another commenter suggested implementing a sliding scale policy with an upper and lower MSR threshold where ACOs would share in a portion of shared savings as long as the lower threshold was met. They recommended this for all ACOs but particularly for ACOs in their first agreement period regardless of revenue status, arguing that it can take multiple years for an ACO to meet the current MSR requirement.

Response: At this time, we decline these commenters' suggestions as they go beyond the scope of the modifications we proposed to the program's eligibility criteria to qualify for shared savings. Additionally, for the reasons discussed in the August 2018 proposed rule (83 FR 41837) and the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 67923), we continue to believe it is appropriate to decline requests to allow ACOs to change their MSR/MLR selection on an annual basis. Allowing for an annual selection of the MSR/MLR by ACOs in a two-sided level of the BASIC Track or the ENHANCED track could lead to gaming as ACOs gain more experience in the program and would not be sufficiently protective of the Trust Funds.

After consideration of the comments, we are finalizing the proposal to increase opportunities for eligible low revenue ACOs to share in savings as proposed. We will use an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score, which, as discussed in section III.G.4.b.(7) of this final rule, will incorporate LIS status in addition to dually eligible beneficiary status and ADI in the calculation of the underserved multiplier, to determine the ACO's eligibility to share in savings and the amount of shared savings for ACOs that meet the alternative quality performance standard. We are also finalizing the proposed revisions to § 425.605 to incorporate this policy without modification.

g. Ongoing Consideration of Concerns About the Impact of the PHE for COVID-19 on ACOs' Expenditures

On January 31, 2020, Health and Human Services Secretary, Alex M. Azar II, declared a PHE for the United States to aid the nation's healthcare community in responding to COVID-19 (hereafter referred to as the PHE for COVID-19). On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) publicly characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. On March 13, 2020, the President of the United States declared the COVID-19 outbreak a national emergency. The term “Public Health Emergency,” as defined in the regulation at § 400.200, identifies the PHE determined to exist nationwide as of January 27, 2020, by the Secretary under Section 319 of the Public Health Service Act on January 31, 2020, as a result of confirmed cases of COVID-19, including any subsequent renewals. This determination was, as of this publication, subsequently renewed on April 21, 2020, July 23, 2020, October 2, 2020, January 7, 2021, April 15, 2021, July 19, 2021, October 15, 2021, January 14, 2022, April 12, 2022, July 15, 2022, and October 13, 2022. In the March 31st COVID-19 IFC (85 FR 19267 and 19268) and the May 8th COVID-19 IFC (85 FR 27573 through 27587) we adopted several modifications to policies under the Shared Savings Program in response to the PHE.

In the March 31st COVID-19 IFC (85 FR 19267 and 19268), we removed the restriction which prevented the application of the Shared Savings Program extreme and uncontrollable circumstances (EUC) policy for disasters that occur during the quality reporting period if the reporting period is extended, to offer relief under the Shared Savings Program to all ACOs that may have been unable to completely and accurately report quality data for 2019 due to the PHE for COVID-19.

In the May 8th COVID-19 IFC (85 FR 27573 through 27587), we modified certain Shared Savings Program policies to: (1) allow ACOs whose current agreement periods expired on December 31, 2020, the option to extend their existing agreement period by 1 year; (2) allow ACOs in the BASIC track's glide path the option to elect to maintain their current level of participation for PY 2021; (3) adjust certain program calculations to remove payment amounts for episodes of care for treatment of COVID-19; and (4) expand the definition of primary care services for purposes of determining beneficiary assignment to include telehealth codes for virtual check-ins, e-visits, and telephonic communication.

As discussed in the May 8th COVID-19 IFC (85 FR 27578 through 27582) and in accordance with § 425.611, all Parts A and B FFS payment amounts for an episode of care for treatment of COVID-19 are excluded from the following Shared Savings Program calculations:

• Calculation of Medicare Parts A and B FFS expenditures for an ACO's assigned beneficiaries for all purposes including the following: Establishing, adjusting, updating, and resetting the ACO's historical benchmark and determining performance year expenditures.

• Calculation of FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries as used in determining county-level FFS expenditures and national Medicare FFS expenditures.

• Calculation of Medicare Parts A and B FFS revenue of ACO participants for purposes of calculating the ACO's loss recoupment limit under the BASIC track as specified in § 425.605(d).

• Calculation of total Medicare Parts A and B FFS revenue of ACO participants and total Medicare Parts A and B FFS expenditures for the ACO's assigned beneficiaries for purposes of identifying whether an ACO is a high revenue ACO or low revenue ACO, as defined under § 425.20, and determining an ACO's eligibility for participation options according to § 425.600(d).

• Calculation or recalculation of the amount of the ACO's repayment mechanism arrangement according to § 425.204(f)(4).

As part of the March 2020 Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, Medicare sequestration adjustments were temporarily suspended. This suspension was further extended through March 31, 2022, in subsequent legislation. From April 1, 2022, to June 30, 2022, sequestration was set at 1 percent. Starting July 1, 2022, sequestration increased to 2 percent. When full Medicare sequestration is in effect, a 2 percent reduction to shared savings payments is applied before applying an ACO's shared savings limit. As a result of the suspension of sequestration, shared savings payments made in CY 2020 and CY 2021 (for PYs 2019 and 2020) were roughly 2 percent higher than they would have been otherwise for ACOs that did not earn shared savings in excess of their shared savings limit.

In December 2017, we issued an interim final rule with comment period entitled “Medicare Program; Medicare Shared Savings Program: Extreme and Uncontrollable Circumstances Policies for Performance Year 2017” (hereinafter referred to as the “December 2017 IFC”), which appeared in the December 26, 2017 Federal Register (82 FR 60912 through 60919). In the December 2017 IFC, we established a policy for mitigating shared losses for Shared Savings Program ACOs participating in a performance-based risk track, when the ACO's assigned beneficiaries were located in geographic areas that were impacted by extreme and uncontrollable circumstances, such as hurricanes, wildfires, or other triggering events, during PY 2017. In the CY 2019 PFS final rule (83 FR 59707), we extended the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy finalized for PY 2017 to PY 2018 and subsequent performance years. We apply determinations made under the Quality Payment Program with respect to whether an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance has occurred and the affected areas. Further, we have sole discretion to determine the time period during which an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance occurred and the percentage of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in the affected areas.

The Secretary's declaration of the PHE for COVID-19 in January 2020 triggered the Medicare Shared Savings Program's Extreme and Uncontrollable Circumstances Policy. The extreme and uncontrollable circumstances of the PHE for COVID-19 began in January 2020 and will apply nationwide for the duration of the PHE for COVID-19. As set forth in §§ 25.605(f) (applicable to ACOs in two-sided models of the BASIC track) and 425.610(i) (applicable to ACOs in the ENHANCED track), we reduce the amount of an ACO's shared losses by an amount determined by multiplying the shared losses by the percentage of the total months in the performance year affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance, and the percentage of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries who reside in an area affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance. The PHE for COVID-19 was considered an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance that applied to all counties in the United States for the entirety of PY 2020 and PY 2021, and no ACOs were liable for shared losses for those performance years as any such losses were fully mitigated by the adjustment for extreme and uncontrollable circumstances.

As a result of forgoing the 2021 application cycle for new applications, agreement periods starting in 2022 are the first agreement periods for which 2020 and 2021 serve as benchmark years for ACOs in the Shared Savings Program. Interested parties have expressed concern that the policy adjustments made in response to the PHE for COVID-19 may not fully address the potential for relatively lower expenditures resulting from lower utilization by non-COVID-19 patients. For example, in 2020, Parts A and B FFS expenditures decreased by 7 percent nationally compared to 2019. This decrease in utilization and expenditures could result in relatively lower benchmark year expenditures for ACOs in agreement periods beginning in 2022, 2023 or 2024 for which 2020 and/or 2021 are benchmark years. Several interested parties have suggested alternative approaches to establishing benchmarks for ACOs for which 2020 and 2021 are benchmark years, including using alternative years (such as 2017, 2018, and 2019), or differently weighting COVID-19 affected years in the calculation of financial benchmarks. In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we noted that the impact of COVID-19 was not uniform for all areas of the country as surges occurred in different geographic areas at different times. Removing specific years from benchmark calculations would have varied effects on different geographic areas depending on when COVID-19 had the largest impact in those areas. Thus, as we explained in the proposed rule, such approaches could produce mixed results; one analysis performed by the Institute for Accountable Care 362 estimated that 55 percent of ACOs would have lower benchmarks if 2020 were dropped from the benchmark period.

362 Institute for Accountable Care. Analysis of Policy Options to Reduce the Impact of COVID-19 on ACO Benchmarks. October 13, 2021. Available at https://www.institute4ac.org/covid-19-aco-benchmarks-analysis/ .

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we described OACT's analysis of current data, which indicated that ACOs exhibiting sharp declines in spending in 2020 tended to show rebounds in spending in 2021 such that historical benchmarks averaged across a base period including both 2020 and 2021 would appear to represent a reasonable basis from which to update ACO spending targets going forward. Due to the rebound in 2021 national expenditures, which increased by roughly 8.4 percent between 2021 Q1 (lowest observed expenditures since the PHE for COVID-19 began) and 2021 Q4, we stated our belief that the current blended national-regional trend and update factors would be sufficient to address and mitigate the impact of the start of the PHE for COVID-19 on benchmark year expenditures. ACOs that did not experience such an increase in spending between 2021 Q1 and 2021 Q4 would still be subject to a regional adjustment that could beneficially impact their benchmark determination. We also explained that the proposal described in section III.G.5.c.(3) of the proposed rule to utilize a three-way blend of the ACPT/national-regional growth rates to update benchmarks would further mitigate any potential adverse effects of the PHE for COVID-19 on historical benchmarks while also protecting against unanticipated variation in performance year expenditures and utilization resulting from a future PHE. We sought comment on the analysis regarding the impact of the PHE for COVID-19 on Shared Savings Program ACOs' expenditures. In addition, we noted that we would continue to monitor the impact of the PHE for COVID-19 to determine whether any further changes may be necessary to account for the effects of this PHE or future PHEs.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the impact of the PHE for COVID-19 on ACOs' expenditures and our responses:

Comment: Several commenters supported the current policies in place to address the impact of the PHE for COVID-19 on ACO expenditures and agreed that no further direct interventions are necessary at this time. One commenter noted that PY 2022 final historical benchmarks, which include both 2020 and 2021, were stable relative to previous benchmarks that did not include years impacted by the PHE for COVID-19. This commenter also asked for clarification regarding when COVID-19 hospitalizations will be added back into expenditure calculations.

Response: We thank these commenters for their support of the existing policies. To clarify, as finalized in the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84780), all Part A and Part B claims that occur during an inpatient episode of treatment for COVID-19 will be removed from program calculations when the date of discharge occurs within the PHE as defined in 42 CFR 400.200. Furthermore, adjustments for episodes of care for the treatment of COVID-19, will continue to be reflected in any program calculations that include the time period covered by the PHE for COVID-19. Thus, any qualifying claims that were excluded from program calculations for a performance year that in the future becomes a benchmark year, will continue to be excluded when that performance year is included in program calculations. In particular, 2020 serves as a benchmark year for currently participating ACOs that entered an agreement period on January 1, 2022 and will also be a benchmark year for ACOs that enter an agreement period on January 1, 2023. In light of the shift to 5-year agreement periods, adjustments made to expenditures during benchmark year 2020 will continue to be reflected in benchmark calculations until the end of PY 2027 (the final performance year for 2023 starters), under the program's existing policies.

Comment: Several commenters expressed concern about including 2020 and 2021 as benchmark years due to the impact of COVID-19 on expenditures and utilization rates. These commenters noted that other Medicare programs have not used years affected by COVID-19 when determining financial or quality benchmarks and requested that CMS extend this policy to the Shared Savings Program. The commenters requested that ACOs be allowed to select years prior to the PHE for COVID-19 to be used as benchmark years in place of 2020 or 2021 because in regions that have been slower to recover from the impact of the pandemic the use of both 2020 and 2021 in combination as benchmark years still will not be enough to mitigate potential negative effects on their benchmarks. One commenter expressed concern about the low utilization rates observed during the PHE for COVID-19 and recommended that CMS consider additional adjustments to account for this.

Response: Our analysis of the 3-year weighted average expenditures used to calculate PY 2022 final historical benchmarks, show that historical benchmarks averaged across a base period including both 2020 and 2021, appear to represent a reasonable basis from which to establish ACO spending targets. Additionally, as spending continues to rebound from the low levels observed in 2020, the national-regional trend factors used to calculate updated historical benchmarks at the time of financial reconciliation will further mitigate any adverse effects that 2020 and 2021 may have on an ACO's financial performance. We also believe that regional trend factors used to update the historical benchmark at the time of financial reconciliation will be sufficient to offset any regional behavior that diverges significantly from national trends.

We did not propose any changes in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule to address the impact of the PHE for COVID-19 on ACOs' expenditures. However, we will continue to monitor the impact of the PHE for COVID-19 on the Shared Savings Program.

h. Supplemental Payment for Indian Health Service and Tribal Hospitals and Hospitals Located in Puerto Rico

As discussed in the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 67856 and 67857), we exclude Indirect Medical Education (IME), Disproportionate Share Hospital (DSH) and uncompensated care payments from ACOs' assigned and assignable beneficiary expenditure calculations because we do not wish to incentivize ACOs to avoid the types of providers that receive these payments, and for other reasons described in earlier rulemaking (76 FR 67919 through 67922, and 80 FR 32796 through 32799). In the FY 2023 IPPS/LTCH PPS final rule (87 FR 49047 through 49051), we established a new supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico, beginning in FY 2023. As explained in the FY 2023 IPPS/LTCH PPS final rule, this supplemental payment is necessary to avoid causing undue long-term financial disruption to IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico as a result of a change in the data used to determine uncompensated care payments for these hospitals beginning in FY 2023.

In order to align Shared Savings Program policies with updates made to Medicare FFS payment policies, we proposed to exclude this supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal Hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico from the determination of Medicare Parts A and B expenditures for purposes of calculations under the Shared Savings Program. Further, for consistency with our current approach of using total revenue, including IME, DSH and uncompensated care payments, in Shared Savings Program calculations of ACO participant revenue, 363 we proposed to similarly include the supplemental payment to IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico in such calculations for the performance year beginning January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years. More specifically, ACO participant revenue is used in determining whether an ACO is a low revenue ACO or high revenue ACO as defined in § 425.20, and in determining the revenue-based loss sharing limits under two-sided models of the BASIC track's glide path in accordance with § 425.605. Because the new supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico is intended to prevent disruptions due to a change in the uncompensated care payment methodology for these hospitals and uses these hospitals' FY 2022 uncompensated care payments as the starting point for this calculation, in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we stated our belief that it should be treated consistently with how we currently treat uncompensated care payments in Shared Savings Program calculations. We sought comment on the proposed change to the determination of Medicare Parts A and B expenditures for purposes of calculations under the Shared Savings Program, including the determination of benchmark and performance year expenditures, as well as the calculation of ACO participant revenue.

363 In the December 2018 final rule, see for example the discussion of the calculation of ACO participant revenue as used in the determining the revenue-based loss sharing limits under the BASIC track (83 FR 67856) and the determination of whether an ACO qualifies as a low revenue ACO or a high revenue ACO (83 FR 67875).

In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67919), we explained that section 1899(d) of the Act provides flexibility to adjust the benchmark for IME and DSH payments, and certain other adjustments to Parts A and B payments. Section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act states, among other things, that the benchmark shall be adjusted for beneficiary characteristics and such other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate. However, when it comes to performance year expenditures, section 1899(d)(1)(B)(i) of the Act provides authority to adjust expenditures in the performance period for beneficiary characteristics, but does not provide authority to adjust for “other factors.” Thus, we noted that while we could make some adjustments to the benchmark pursuant to section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act, to exclude certain payments, we could not make similar adjustments in our calculation of performance year expenditures. In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67921 and 67922), we adopted an alternate payment methodology that excluded IME and DSH payments from ACO benchmark and performance year expenditures, as authorized by section 1899(i) of the Act. We have maintained this approach to excluding IME and DSH payments across all Shared Savings Program calculations of benchmark and performance year expenditures, as specified in 42 CFR part 425, subpart G.

Consistent with our longstanding policy with respect to excluding IME and DSH payments from benchmarking and performance year expenditures, we proposed to use our authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to use other payment models to remove the supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico from performance year expenditures. To exercise our authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to use other payment models, we must demonstrate that the payment model would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare program and that program expenditures under the alternative methodology would be equal to or lower than those that would result under the statutory payment model. Because we proposed to exclude the supplemental payment from benchmark year expenditures using our authority under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act, we explained that removing this payment from performance year expenditures would ensure greater parity between benchmark and performance year expenditure calculations. Further, we noted that by removing the supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico from performance year expenditures, we can reward more accurately actual decreases in unnecessary utilization of health care services. Excluding supplemental payments for IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico from performance year expenditure calculations ensures these payments do not make it more challenging for an ACO to generate shared savings as compared to its updated historical benchmark. We also noted that, for ACOs participating under two-sided models of the BASIC track's glide path, excluding the supplemental payment from performance year expenditures may help to mitigate the amount of losses generated by an ACO, although including the supplemental payment in the calculation of ACO participant revenue used to determine the revenue-based loss sharing limit may result in a relatively higher loss sharing limit used in determining an ACO's shared losses.

As discussed in the proposed rule, considering the balance of these factors, we believed that the approach, as proposed, could help ensure participation of IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico in ACOs, and their engagement in the accountable care model. In turn, this could result in Medicare beneficiaries receiving higher quality, better coordinated and more cost-efficient care in these settings. We also noted that we did not expect that excluding the new supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico from performance year expenditures would result in greater payments to ACOs than would otherwise have been made if the new supplemental payment were included. We indicated that we would continue to reexamine this policy in the future to ensure that the requirement under section 1899(i)(3)(B) of the Act that an alternative payment model not result in additional program expenditures continues to be satisfied. We also noted that in the event that we later determine that the payment model established under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act no longer meets this requirement, we would undertake additional notice and comment rulemaking to make adjustments to the payment model to assure continued compliance with the statutory requirements.

We proposed to modify the provisions of the existing regulations describing calculations of benchmark year and performance year expenditures to incorporate a reference to the exclusion of the new supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico, for the performance year beginning January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years, and to include this exclusion in proposed new sections of the regulations as follows:

• Within § 425.601(a)(1)(i) and proposed § 425.652(a)(1)(i), specifying the calculation of payment amounts included in Parts A and B FFS claims using a 3-month claims run out with a completion factor, for computing per capita Medicare Parts A and B benchmark expenditures for beneficiaries that would have been assigned to ACO in any of the 3 most recent years prior to the start of the agreement period.

• Within § 425.601(c)(2)(i) and proposed § 425.654(a)(2)(i), specifying the calculation of county-level assignable beneficiary expenditures using payment amounts included in Parts A and B FFS claims with dates of service in the 12-month calendar year for the relevant benchmark or performance year, using a 3-month claims run out with a completion factor.

• Within § 425.605(a)(5)(i), describing the calculation of performance year expenditures under the BASIC track using payment amounts included in Medicare Parts A and B FFS claims for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for the performance year.

• Within § 425.610(a)(6)(i), describing the calculation of performance year expenditures under the ENHANCED track using payment amounts included in Medicare Parts A and B FFS claims for the ACO's assigned beneficiaries for the performance year.

• Within proposed § 425.660(b)(1)(i), describing the calculation of the ACPT.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on our proposals regarding the treatment of the supplemental payments for IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico for purposes of calculations under the Shared Savings Program and our responses:

Comment: We received one comment supporting our proposal to modify the provisions of the existing regulations describing calculations of benchmark year and performance year expenditures to incorporate a reference to the exclusion of the new supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico, for the performance year beginning January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years. This commenter offered support without rationale.

Response: We appreciate the commenter's support of this proposal. We are finalizing our proposal to exclude the new supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico from the calculation of benchmark year and performance year expenditures for the performance year beginning January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years. We are also finalizing the modifications to the existing regulations describing calculations of benchmark and performance year expenditures to incorporate a reference to the exclusion of the new supplemental payment, as proposed. Further, as discussed in the proposed rule, we will include the supplemental payment to IHS/Tribal hospitals and hospitals located in Puerto Rico in Shared Savings Program calculations of ACO participant revenue for the performance year beginning January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years.

i. Organization and Structure of the Regulations Text Within 42 CFR Part 425 Subpart G; Technical and Conforming Changes

In section III.G.5.i of the proposed rule (87 FR 46201 and 46202), we explained that since the Shared Savings Program was established in 2012, the benchmarking methodology has been specified in several sections of the Shared Savings Program regulations within 42 CFR part 425, subpart G. Section 425.601 specifies the methodology for establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark for agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years. Sections 425.602 and 425.603 specify the benchmarking methodology applicable to earlier agreement periods for new and renewing ACOs, respectively. We noted that we have tended to include the entirety of the benchmarking methodology applicable to ACOs, based on their agreement period start date, within a single section of the regulations. We also explained that there is a limited number of unused sections within the range between §§ 425.600 and 425.613, and no remaining sections in sequential order immediately following the existing benchmarking sections within this range.

A variety of other provisions are contained within subpart G. Specifically, § 425.600 specifies selection of risk models. The methodology for calculation of shared savings or losses (as applicable) under each of the Shared Savings Program's financial models is specified within §§ 425.604 (Track 1), 425.605 (BASIC track), 425.606 (Track 2), and 425.610 (ENHANCED track). Several sections specify particular requirements or exceptions relating to determining performance for ACOs in earlier performance years: § 425.608 applied to determine first year performance for ACOs beginning their participation in the program on April 1 or July 1, 2012; and § 425.609 applied to determine performance for a 6-month performance year (or performance period) during CY 2019. Section 425.611 specifies adjustments to Shared Savings Program calculations to address the COVID-19 pandemic. Section 425.612 specifies waivers of payment rules and other Medicare requirements, including the SNF 3-day rule waiver, and § 425.613 addresses expanded use of telehealth services furnished by physicians or other practitioners participating in applicable Shared Savings Program ACOs.

As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we considered how to restructure the regulations to incorporate the proposed modifications to the benchmarking methodology in the proposed rule. One consideration discussed was that the existing provisions of the regulations under subpart G are referred to within programmatic material, including guidance and technical specifications documents. For continuity and clarity, we noted that it would be important to maintain the organization of the existing provisions, as opposed to renumbering these existing sections. We also considered the need for a regulations text structure that would organize the details for the multiple aspects of the benchmarking calculations, each of which is detailed and complex. Lastly, as discussed in section III.G.2. of the proposed rule, we proposed to specify the policies governing the proposed AIPs in a new section of the regulations at § 425.630. For these reasons, we proposed to specify the proposed modifications to the benchmarking methodology for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years in a series of new regulations at §§ 425.650 through 425.660. We proposed the following organization and structure for subpart G of the regulations:

• Reserve sections §§ 425.614 through 425.629, prior to the proposed new section of the regulations at § 425.630 on the option to receive AIPs.

• Reserve sections §§ 425.631 through 425.649.

• Establish a new section of the regulations at § 425.650, generally describing the organization of the sections on the benchmarking methodology within 42 CFR part 425, subpart G.

• Establish a new section of the regulations at § 425.652 which specifies the methodology for establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

• Establish a new section of the regulations at § 425.654, which specifies the methodology for calculating county expenditures and regional expenditures for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

• Establish a new section of the regulations at § 425.656, which specifies the methodology for calculating the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

• Establish a new section of the regulations at § 425.658, which specifies the methodology for calculating the prior savings adjustment to the historical benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

• Establish a new section of the regulations at § 425.660, which specifies the methodology for calculating the ACPT used in updating the historical benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

We also proposed to make certain technical and conforming changes to the following provisions to reflect the proposal to add new regulations at §§ 425.652 through 425.660 to establish the benchmarking methodology applicable to all agreement periods starting on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

• Under subpart C, which governs application procedures, add a reference to § 425.652 in § 425.204(g).

• Under subpart G, which governs shared savings and losses calculations, do the following—

++ In § 425.600(f)(4), add a reference to § 425.656(d) in § 425.600(f)(4)(ii) and a reference to § 425.652(c) in § 425.600(f)(4)(iii);

++ Revise § 425.601 to specify that it applies to agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, and before January 1, 2024;

++ Add references to § 425.652 in §§ 425.605(a), 425.605(a)(2), 425.605(d)(1)(iii)(D)( 2 ), 425.605(d)(1)(iv)(D)( 2 ), 425.605(d)(1)(v)(D)( 2 ), 425.610(a), and 425.610(g);

++ Add a reference to § 425.652(a)(10) in § 425.610(a)(3);

++ Add a reference to § 425.654(a) in § 425.611(c)(2)(i);

++ Add a reference to § 425.652(a)(4) in § 425.611(c)(2)(ii)(A);

++ Add a reference to § 425.654(a)(3) in § 425.611(c)(2)(ii)(B);

++ Within § 425.611(c)(2)(iii), remove the specific reference to 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries, to account for the proposed modifications to the cap on the regional adjustment as specified in section III.G.5.c.(5) of the proposed rule, and to add a reference to § 425.656(c)(3), which refers to the cap of 5 percent of the national per capita expenditure amount applied to positive regional adjustments, and the cap of 1.5 percent of the national per capita expenditure amount applied to negative regional adjustments for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years; and add a reference to § 425.652(a)(8)(iv) which refers to the cap equal to 5 percent of the national per capita expenditure amount that is applied in calculating the prior savings adjustment; and

++ Add references to § 425.652(a)(5)(ii) (referring to the national component of the blended growth rates used to trend forward BY1 and BY2 expenditures to BY3) and § 425.652(b)(2)(i) (referring to the national component of the blended growth rate used to update the benchmark) in § 425.611(c)(2)(v).

• Under subpart I, which governs the reconsideration review process, add a reference to § 425.652 in § 425.800(a)(4).

We also proposed to correct the following inadvertent errors in cross-references:

• In § 425.601(f)(5)(ii), remove the reference “paragraph (f)(4)(i) of this section”, and add in its place the reference “paragraph (f)(5)(i) of this section”.

• In § 425.601(f)(5)(iv), remove the reference “paragraphs (f)(1) and (2) of this section”, and add in its place the reference “paragraphs (f)(1) through (3) of this section”.

Additionally, we explained our belief that it would be appropriate to specify in the proposed new regulation at § 425.656(e) a narrower set of special rules for determining the weights used in calculating the regional adjustment for certain ACOs that previously participated in the Shared Savings Program. In the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68024), we established § 425.601(e)(2)(ii) which specifies that for renewing or re-entering ACOs whose prior agreement period benchmark was calculated according to § 425.603(c), we consider the agreement period the ACO is entering upon renewal or re-entry in combination with either of the following in determining the weight used in the regional adjustment calculation in the ACO's new agreement period: (A) The weight previously applied to calculate the regional adjustment to the ACO's benchmark in the ACO's most recent prior agreement period; or (B) For new ACOs that are identified as re-entering ACOs, we consider the weight previously applied to calculate the regional adjustment to the benchmark for the ACO in which the majority of the new ACO's participants were participating previously. With the agreement period beginning on January 1, 2022, all ACOs continuing their participation in the Shared Savings Program that were previously under the benchmarking rebasing methodology specified in § 425.603 are now participating under the benchmarking methodology specified in § 425.601. However, it is possible that an ACO that participated in a second agreement period beginning on January 1, 2017, January 1, 2018, or January 1, 2019, and whose rebased benchmark was established in accordance with § 425.603(c), and whose participation agreement expired without having been renewed, or whose participation agreement was terminated under § 425.218 or § 425.220, may seek to re-enter the Shared Savings Program. Therefore, we explained our belief that it would be necessary to maintain special rules for determining the weights used in the regional adjustment calculation for re-entering ACOs. Accordingly, we proposed to incorporate the policies that currently apply to re-entering ACOs under § 425.601(e)(2)(ii) in the new regulation at § 425.656(e).

Lastly, we proposed to remove from the existing regulations on calculating county expenditures and regional expenditures an extraneous step in the calculation specified under § 425.601(d)(3). This provision specifies that CMS weights aggregate expenditure values determined for each population of beneficiaries according to Medicare enrollment type to reflect the proportion of the ACO's overall beneficiary population in the applicable Medicare enrollment type for the relevant benchmark or performance year. However, as we noted in the proposed rule, at no point in the calculation do we actually combine the risk-adjusted regional expenditures across the four Medicare enrollment types to determine a single risk-adjusted regional expenditure value. Risk-adjusted regional expenditures are incorporated in all relevant calculations at the Medicare enrollment type level. Similarly, as part of our proposal to establish a new regulation at § 425.654 to govern the calculation of county expenditures and regional expenditures for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, we would also omit this extraneous step in the calculation.

We did not receive any comments specifically addressing the organization and structure of the regulations text within 42 CFR part 425 subpart G, or the technical and conforming changes proposed in section III.G.5.i of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, and we are finalizing these changes as proposed with the exception of minor technical corrections to the structure and formatting of § 425.601(d). We note that to the extent that comments addressed proposed provisions within the new regulations at § 425.630 and §§ 425.650 through 425.660, these comments are summarized and responded to elsewhere within section III.G.5. of this final rule.

6. Administrative Burden and Other Policy Refinements

a. Overview

We are dedicated to reducing unnecessary ACO and CMS administrative burden where possible. In response to requests from interested parties from prior rules, we proposed 2 burden reduction proposals and 2 policy refinements in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule. We noted that if finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, the policy proposals and refinements would be implemented January 1, 2023. Specifically, we proposed the following, which are discussed in more detail in sections (b) through (e) below:

• Modify § 425.310 to eliminate the requirement for an ACO to submit marketing materials to CMS for review and approval prior to disseminating notifications to beneficiaries and participants.

• Amend the beneficiary notification requirements at § 425.312 to reduce the frequency of certain beneficiary notifications from once annually to once in an agreement period, and to further clarify the settings in which ACO participants are expected to make required beneficiary notifications by displaying signs in their facilities.

• Streamline the SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver application review process by amending requirements at § 425.612(a)(1)(i)(A) to include an ACO attestation that plan narratives are in place and available to CMS upon request.

• Amend the regulations at §§ 425.702(c)(2) and 425.704(b) to recognize ACOs structured as OHCAs for data sharing purposes.

We noted that we anticipate that, collectively, these proposals would significantly reduce administrative burden in the Shared Savings Program.

b. Modify Marketing Material Review Requirements

(1) Background

The Shared Savings Program regulations define “marketing materials and activities” at § 425.20 to include, without limitation, “general audience materials” and activities used or conducted by or on behalf of the ACO, or by ACO participants, or ACO providers/suppliers when used to educate, solicit, notify, or contact Medicare beneficiaries or providers and suppliers about the Shared Savings Program. General audience materials include brochures, advertisements, outreach events, letters to beneficiaries, web pages, data-sharing opt-out letters, mailings, and social media. The following beneficiary communications are not marketing materials and activities: certain informational materials customized or limited to a subset of beneficiaries; materials that do not include information about the ACO, its ACO participants, or its ACO providers/suppliers; materials that cover beneficiary-specific billing and claims issues or other specific individual health-related issues; educational information on specific medical conditions; written referrals for health care items and services; and materials or activities that do not constitute “marketing” under 45 CFR 164.501 and 164.508(a)(3)(i).

In addition, the Shared Savings Program regulations impose certain marketing requirements at § 425.310 regarding the content and approval of marketing materials and activities. Specifically, under § 425.310(c), all marketing materials and activities must: (1) use template language developed by CMS, if available; (2) not be used in a discriminatory manner or for discriminatory purposes; (3) comply with § 425.304 regarding beneficiary incentives; and (4) not be materially inaccurate or misleading. Under § 425.310(a), marketing materials may be used 5 business days following their submission to CMS if: (1) The ACO certifies compliance with all the marketing requirements under this section; and (2) CMS does not disapprove the marketing materials or activities. Under § 425.310(b), marketing materials and activities are deemed approved after the initial 5-day review period. In other words, if CMS has not disapproved of the marketing submission within 5 days, the ACO may use the submitted marketing materials. CMS may subsequently issue a written notice of disapproval at any time, including after the expiration of the initial 5-day review period, at which point the ACO must discontinue use of the disapproved marketing materials. Per § 425.310(d), failure of an ACO to comply with the marketing requirements will subject the ACO to pre-termination actions sets forth in § 425.216, termination from the program under § 425.218, or both.

As indicated in the November 2011 final rule (74 FR 67948), we finalized these marketing policies as an aspect of patient-centeredness, indicating that we believed it would be appropriate and consistent with the purpose and intent of the statute to limit and monitor the use of ACO-related marketing activities and materials to ensure that such communications and marketing are used only for appropriate purposes, such as notification that a beneficiary's healthcare provider is participating in the ACO, issuance of any CMS-required notices, or notification of provider or ACO terminations.

Historically, the majority of marketing submissions for the Shared Savings Program are approved upon review or are found not to constitute marketing materials and activities, as defined at § 425.20. For example, in 2021, of 241 Shared Savings Program marketing material submissions reviewed by CMS, 163 (~68 percent) of those submissions were approved, while only 1 submission (0.4 percent) was denied. For the remaining 77 submissions (~32 percent), 58 submissions did not to meet the definition of marketing materials and activities; 9 were approved after the ACO responded with additional information or resubmitted revised materials; 9 were withdrawn for unspecified reasons, and 1 was neither approved nor denied and remained in non-compliant status.

We believe that marketing materials and activities are important communications between an ACO and its patients and participants, and we remain committed to patient-centered care, patient engagement, and program transparency in the Shared Savings Program. However, given the breakdown of marketing material review dispositions, the time and resources CMS currently expends to review all submitted marketing materials, and the additional effort involved in ACOs submitting these materials prior to use, we believe the current submission requirements create an unnecessary administrative burden for both CMS and ACOs that is not outweighed by the benefits of the current policy.

(2) Modify Regulations on Review of ACO Marketing Materials

To reduce unnecessary administrative burden, we proposed to remove the requirement at § 425.310(a) that ACOs submit marketing materials and activities to CMS before use, but to maintain the requirement that ACOs must provide marketing materials upon request. Additionally, we proposed to remove the provisions in § 425.310(b) regarding deemed approval of marketing materials and activities after a 5-day review period. We noted that ACOs must continue to comply with all Shared Savings Program regulations, including the marketing material content requirements that currently appear at § 425.310(c). As proposed, the policy does not affect an ACO's obligation to comply with marketing content requirements, and we proposed to retain the authority to request the submission of marketing materials and activities at any time. We proposed that if we determine an ACO's marketing materials and activities to be non-compliant, we will issue a written notice of disapproval under proposed § 425.310(b)(1). In addition, we proposed that ACOs must discontinue (and must require its ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and other individuals or entities performing functions or services related to ACO activities to discontinue) use of any disapproved materials or activities. Under our proposal, we would retain language stating that the failure to comply with the requirements of § 425.310 will subject the ACO to the penalties set forth in § 425.216, termination under § 425.218, or both.

We believe that the existing marketing material content requirements and the proposed policy to review marketing materials and activities upon request would provide sufficient safeguards and appropriate patient protections. Additionally, beneficiaries may express concerns regarding ACO marketing materials by utilizing the 1-800-MEDICARE hotline, contacting their healthcare provider, or submitting a complaint to the Medicare Ombudsman's office, while ACOs and other interested parties may use any of these avenues, as well as express concerns via the Shared Savings Program mailbox or via their ACO coordinators.

We noted that we would codify the proposal by revising § 425.310 to remove existing references to CMS' collection, review, and approval of marketing materials. Specifically, we proposed to remove the marketing material file and use requirement at § 425.310(a) so that they may be used without prior approval. We proposed that § 425.310(a) would set forth without change the marketing material content requirements that currently appear in paragraph (c) (for example, the requirement to use template language and not be materially inaccurate or misleading). We proposed to revise paragraph (b) to remove language at § 425.310 (b)(1) regarding deemed approval after expiration of a 5-day review period and to retitle the section “Monitoring.” Under proposed paragraph (b)(1), CMS may request the submission of marketing materials and activities at any time, and if CMS determines that the marketing materials and activities do not comply with the content requirements of paragraph (a), CMS will issue written notice of disapproval to the ACO. Proposed paragraph (b)(2) sets forth without change language that currently appears § 425.310(b)(2)(ii) regarding the duty to cease use of disapproved marketing materials and activities. Finally, proposed paragraph (c) would set forth, without change, the sanctions provision that currently appears at § 425.310(d).

We noted that if finalized, our proposed modifications to § 425.310 would become effective on January 1, 2023. We believe that, if finalized, this proposal would reduce administrative burden for both CMS and for ACOs, while maintaining program integrity and beneficiary protections. We believe the revised regulation would provide sufficient safeguards and appropriate patient protections.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposal to modify regulations on the review of ACO marketing materials and our responses:

Comment: Many commenters supported the proposal to eliminate the requirement that ACOs submit marketing materials to CMS for review and approval prior to dissemination among ACO participants and Medicare beneficiaries. Many commenters encouraged CMS to finalize this policy as proposed and agreed that marketing notices include important program information for ACO participants and beneficiaries and that materials can be retained and provided to CMS upon request with minimal burden.

Response: We appreciate commenters' support of our proposal to modify the program requirements for submitting marketing materials prior to use. We remind commenters that CMS is maintaining the current requirement for ACOs to make any marketing materials available to CMS upon request. As we stated in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46203), we have found that most marketing materials are compliant, and that because the majority of materials are compliant, the submission of marketing materials prior to use is an unnecessary program burden. We appreciate commenters' support of the proposal to eliminate the requirement that ACOs submit marketing materials to CMS for review and approval prior to dissemination among ACO participants and Medicare beneficiaries.

Comment: A few commenters disagreed with CMS's proposal to remove the requirement that ACOs submit marketing materials for review and approval before disseminating them. The commenters contended that marketing materials and activities are important communications between an ACO and its beneficiaries and ACO participants. Therefore, they stressed that continued review by CMS of marketing materials before use is essential.

Response: We appreciate commenters' support of important patient protections in providing program communications to patients that empower them to make informed choices about where and how they receive care. We disagree that the current file and use requirements are essential. ACOs have an understanding of marketing requirements and have systems in place to adhere to all marketing material requirements, as demonstrated by the generally compliant materials ACOs have submitted to CMS for review and approval. As we noted in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, CMS conducted an analysis on all marketing materials reviewed in PY 2021 and found that less than 1 percent of submitted materials were not approved. Therefore, we believe that the submission of marketing materials prior to use is an unnecessary administrative burden for ACOs. Our proposed policy maintains the requirement that ACOs must make materials available upon CMS request and CMS reserves to right to review all, or a subset, of an ACO's marketing material at any point during the agreement period. Based on our prior experience, we believe that this requirement is sufficient to ensure continued adherence to Shared Savings Program policies and will uphold and safeguard important beneficiary protections.

Comment: We received a few comments suggesting that CMS make template language publicly available to promote transparency and solicit feedback from ACOs, patient advocacy groups, and other interested parties. Commenters also requested flexibility from CMS in the template language to be site-specific with regards to the type of practice or facility, in an effort to ensure that the language enhances beneficiary understanding of the benefits of receiving care in an ACO and advising them of important program requirements such as data sharing with CMS and among the different providers who coordinate a beneficiary's care. Additionally, we received one comment requesting that CMS eliminate the posted notice requirement completely.

Response: We appreciate commenters' suggestions on how to improve program marketing materials and templates and are committed to working with CMS' Office of Communications to revise our communication templates with the goal of decreasing beneficiary confusion and ensuring the provided information is clearly communicated and understood by a wide audience. However, we disagree that CMS should eliminate the posted notice requirement or grant flexibility allowing ACOs to make changes to the template to communicate the type of facility being represented and contend that templates are different from other types of marketing materials because of the standardization of the content across ACOs. We also note that templates are intended to balance program benefits (improved care quality and coordination) and inform providers and suppliers of incentives (the potential to earn shared savings) when participating in value-based healthcare and that this information be transparent for all involved and reiterate that CMS will make efforts to ensure that future template versions are versatile and convey the appropriate information, regardless of facility type.

For the reasons provided above, we are finalizing our proposal without change effective January 1, 2023. Specifically, we are reorganizing and revising § 425.310 to remove the provision at § 425.310(a) regarding the obligation to submit marketing materials to CMS prior to use. Revised § 425.310(a) sets forth without change the marketing material content requirements that currently appear in paragraph (c) (for example, the requirement to use template language and not be materially inaccurate or misleading). Under revised § 425.310(b)(1), CMS may request the submission of marketing materials and activities at any time, and if CMS determines that the marketing materials and activities do not comply with the content requirements of § 425.310(a), CMS will issue written notice of disapproval to the ACO. Under § 425.310(b)(2), the ACO must discontinue, and must require its ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and other individuals or entities performing functions or services related to ACO activities to discontinue, use of any marketing materials or activities disapproved by CMS. Additionally, under § 425.310(c), failure to comply with this section will subject the ACO to the penalties set forth in § 425.216, termination under § 425.218, or both.

We again appreciate commenters' overwhelming support and suggestions for improving Shared Savings Program policies and in reducing unnecessary program burden. We will continue to work with the CMS Office of Communications to improve required templates and posters to ease beneficiary confusion, while ensuring that content features plain language, and is clear and concise.

c. Modify Beneficiary Notification Requirements

(1) Background

Under § 425.312(a), an ACO is required to ensure that Medicare FFS beneficiaries are notified of the following: (1) that each ACO participant and its ACO providers/suppliers are participating in the Shared Savings Program; (2) the beneficiary's opportunity to decline claims data sharing; and (3) the ability to, and process by which, the beneficiary may identify or change identification of a primary care provider for purposes of voluntary alignment.

Section 425.312(a)(2) sets forth the manner in which ACOs or ACO participants are required to notify beneficiaries of this information. ACO participants must post signs in their facilities and, in settings in which beneficiaries receive primary care services, make standardized written notices available upon request. In addition, in the case of an ACO that has selected preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, the ACO or ACO participant must provide each FFS beneficiary with a standardized written notice prior to or at the first primary care visit of the performance year (§ 425.312(a)(2)(ii)). Finally, in the case of an ACO that has selected prospective assignment, the ACO or ACO participant must provide the standardized written notice to each prospectively assigned beneficiary prior to or at the first primary care visit of the performance year (§ 425.312(a)(2)(iii)).

We periodically receive inquiries from ACOs seeking clarification as to the types of facilities in which signs are required to be posted. In addition, ACOs have continued to express concern regarding the obligation to provide an annual standardized notification prior to or at a beneficiary's first primary care service visit of the performance year. Specifically, ACOs state that such notices may confuse beneficiaries, who misinterpret the notice and believe that it signifies a change to their Medicare benefits or otherwise represents an undesirable or disadvantageous change regarding their health care services. ACOs assert that this confusion may cause a beneficiary to opt out of data sharing, which could result in less cohesive care, duplicative or unnecessary medical tests, or contraindicated prescription drug therapy. ACOs have reported that the information in the beneficiary information notice is unclear and that the frequency of notifications containing identical information is redundant. According to ACOs, the beneficiary notices also cause unnecessary administrative burden to ACOs because ACOs retain documentation that the notices were sent, and ACOs may be required to perform additional follow-up for patients contacting ACOs with questions regarding the notice.

CMS remains committed to program transparency. Beneficiary notices are important communication tools, and we believe that ACOs are in the best position to communicate with beneficiaries regarding their care and the purposes for Medicare claims data sharing. We want to ensure that beneficiaries understand the advantages of their participation in ACOs, that their data is secure, that only the minimum necessary data is collected, and how this data is used for purposes of improving the quality of care for beneficiaries in the Shared Savings Program. We are working to improve the beneficiary notice to ensure that the content of the notice utilizes plain language and is beneficiary-friendly, as well as affirming patient choice and clarifying the beneficiary's opportunity to decline claims data sharing.

(2) Clarify Location of Beneficiary Notification Signage

ACOs and ACO participants frequently ask whether CMS requires signage to be posted in all facilities or only those where primary care services are provided. Although we believe the existing regulation text is clear on this point, we wish to provide clarification that ACO participants are required to post beneficiary notification signs in all of their facilities, whether or not primary care services are provided in every facility. Accordingly, we proposed to modify § 425.312(a)(2)(i) to move the requirement for standardized written notices available to the newly proposed, redesignated § 425.312(a)(2)(ii). With this modification, CMS clarifies that an ACO participant must post signs in “all” of its facilities and make standardized written notices available upon request in “all” settings in which beneficiaries receive primary care services. Signage notifies the entirety of a patient population that the facility participates in an ACO, and therefore, is qualitatively different from standardized written notices provided directly to individual patients in conjunction with primary care service visits. We noted that the requirement to furnish standardized written notices upon the request of a beneficiary applies only in settings or facilities in which beneficiaries receive primary care services. We did not propose to expand the care settings in which standardized written notices must be furnished to beneficiaries upon request.

(3) Reduce the Frequency of Annual Standardized Written Notices

In addition to providing standardized written notices to beneficiaries upon request, ACOs and ACO participants are currently required to furnish standardized written notices prior to or at the first primary care visit of the performance year (§ 425.312(a)(2)(iii), (iv)). We continue to believe that requiring periodic beneficiary notifications affords ACOs and ACO participants an opportunity for direct engagement with the beneficiary, thereby serving to strengthen the beneficiary's relationship with the ACO and ACO participants from whom the beneficiary may receive care. The requirement promotes program transparency and empowers patients with the knowledge of the ACO's mission, data sharing requirements, and ACO operations, thereby allowing patients to make informed decisions about where they receive care. Therefore, we intend to retain the beneficiary notification policies, but in the interest of an overall reduction in administrative burden, we proposed to modify § 425.312(a) to reduce the frequency with which an ACO or ACO participant must furnish standardized written notifications to beneficiaries from up to 5 times per agreement period to once per agreement period. We also proposed to implement a new follow-up beneficiary communication that we expect will reduce beneficiary confusion and improve beneficiary comprehension. The proposed changes would become effective January 1, 2023.

First, we proposed to revise the requirements regarding annual beneficiary notifications, which currently appear at § 425.312(a)(2)(ii) and (iii). Specifically, at proposed § 425.312(a)(2)(iii), we proposed to provide that, in the case of an ACO that has selected preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, the ACO or ACO participant must provide each FFS beneficiary with a standardized written notice at least once during an agreement period. Similarly, at proposed § 425.312(a)(2)(iv), we proposed to provide that, in the case of an ACO that has selected prospective assignment, the ACO or ACO participant must provide each prospectively assigned beneficiary with a standardized written notice at least once during an agreement period. In either case, the standardized written notice must be furnished prior to or at the first primary care service visit during the first performance year in which the beneficiary receives a primary care service from an ACO participant, and the notice must be in the form and manner specified by CMS.

Second, in the interest of ensuring program transparency, maintaining beneficiary protections, reducing beneficiary confusion, and improving beneficiary comprehension, we proposed at § 425.312(a)(2)(v) to require the ACO or ACO participant to follow up with each beneficiary to whom it furnished the standardized written notice pursuant to proposed § 425.312(a)(2)(iii) or (iv). We proposed that the follow-up communication may be verbal or written and must occur no later than the earlier of the beneficiary's next primary care service visit or 180 days from the date the first standardized written notice was provided. The follow-up communication must afford the beneficiary an opportunity to ask any outstanding questions they may have, thereby reducing any potential beneficiary confusion and improving their understanding of the advantages of value-based care. The follow-up communication may be provided in any manner, so long as the form of the follow-up communication includes a meaningful opportunity for beneficiaries to ask questions and engage with a representative of the ACO or ACO participant with regard to the beneficiary notice. Because of the flexibility granted to ACOs in communicating key features of the beneficiary notification, we proposed that ACOs track and document how this beneficiary communication is implemented and make this documentation available to CMS upon request.

ACOs should administer the communication in the way that best suits their beneficiary population. We believe that while the follow-up communication would be most effective when occurring during a primary care service visit, it may be delivered in another manner. We noted that while it is permissible to provide the standardized written notice again during the course of the follow-up communication, simply providing the same standardized written notice as the full extent of the follow-up communication is not sufficient to satisfy the proposed requirements at § 425.312(a)(v), since doing so would not allow for an opportunity to engage the beneficiary and ensure they have the chance to ask any questions they may have as a result of receiving the standardized written notice. The implementation of the follow-up communication does not create a new benefit or billable service, and therefore, no additional payment will be made for the follow-up communication.

We are actively engaged in efforts to improve beneficiary notification materials, which include gathering feedback from beneficiaries and beneficiary representatives to make improvements as to how we disseminate information to beneficiaries. Further, we noted that we would work expeditiously to provide any updated and new materials as they become available. Although the proposal would reduce the frequency with which beneficiaries would receive the information that appears in standardized written notices, we noted that this information remains readily available via signage in ACO facilities, as well as appearing in the Medicare & You Handbook. Additionally, we indicated that we would maintain the requirement for ACO participants to make the notice available upon request in all settings in which beneficiaries receive primary care services. We noted that ACOs and ACO participants may choose to provide the standardized written notice or follow-up beneficiary engagement communications more frequently than once per agreement period, and we would support their efforts to do so.

We sought comment on the proposed frequency of the notification and whether our proposal will reduce net burden and mitigate any potential beneficiary confusion.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposed modifications to the beneficiary notification requirements and our responses:

Comment: Many commenters supported providing beneficiary notification requirements once per agreement period rather than once per performance year and agreed that such a change would reduce administrative burden and ensure program transparency for beneficiaries.

Response: We appreciate commenters' support of our proposal to reduce unnecessary administrative burden by amending our regulation to require the provision of beneficiary notices once during an agreement period. As discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we agree that reducing the frequency of these notifications would reduce confusion for beneficiaries.

Comment: One commenter specifically supported the follow-up communication, particularly in light of our proposal to reduce the frequency of beneficiary notifications that are currently furnished annually. The commenter encouraged CMS to finalize the follow-up communication proposal as proposed because it would increase beneficiary protections.

Response: We appreciate this commenter's support for our proposal for a follow-up communication. We agree that a follow-up communication is important to ensure that beneficiaries understand the notification and have an opportunity to ask questions about the Shared Savings Program and the benefits of value-based care. We also find that while there may be some burden in providing the follow-up communication, there is an overall reduction in burden for ACOs, as the proposed policy reduces the number of times that the beneficiary notice will be provided during an agreement period.

Comment: Many commenters requested flexibility in the beneficiary information notice template and requested that CMS allow ACOs to tailor the language of the written notice and modify template language to best meet the needs of their beneficiaries within set standards. Other commenters requested flexibility in how an ACO provides the follow-up communication, suggesting that it should be via email or secure patient portal.

Response: We appreciate commenters' request for flexibility in the beneficiary notification language and the manner in which ACOs must conduct the follow-up communication. CMS conducted focus groups with beneficiaries and interested parties to improve the notification template. We believe strongly that our efforts to revise the notification templates, based on feedback from the focus groups, will reduce beneficiary confusion, improve clarity and clearly communicate the benefits of value-based care and do not believe that allowing modifications to the template language would further these goals or best serve the interests of Medicare beneficiaries. The revised notification and poster templates will be made available to ACOs this fall for use at the start of the January 1, 2023 performance year and will continue to allow for the inclusion of ACO-specific information in fillable fields. Furthermore, as we noted in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we expect ACOs to conduct follow-up communications in the manner that best suits their patient population. We agree with commenters that this flexibility is necessary and expect that some follow-up communications will take place face to face, while others may be conducted via email or telephone outreach, or in a follow-up mailing, as long as there is a meaningful opportunity for engagement, and depending on the frequency of primary care visits and the health status of the patient.

Comment: Most commenters did not support the follow-up communication and contend that follow-up communication creates significant operational burden without meaningful benefit, as it requires significant administrative cost to coordinate, train, and document and it is unclear whether beneficiaries wish to have such an opportunity. Other commenters expressed that multiple notices, even a follow-up notice, will confuse beneficiaries. These commenters believe that one clear and concise notice is sufficient, and suggested that CMS explore alternate strategies and work with ACOs to promote beneficiary education and engagement.

Response: We appreciate commenters' thoughts on the practical effects of implementing a follow up beneficiary communication but disagree that a follow-up notice will increase confusion. We note that while the implementation of this policy may create some level of administrative burden, there is still an overall net reduction in the total amount of communications ACOs are required to convey under this final rule. Further, there are multiple acceptable options that ACOs may use when operationalizing this requirement. As we stated in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, the most desirable form of follow-up would occur face to face (for instance, at a primary care office visit), where the beneficiary and provider can discuss potential concerns. However, we understand that depending upon a patient's health status or other circumstances, the patient may not have another primary care visit within the 180-day window. In those cases, we believe that alternate forms of outreach to the beneficiary as described in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule would be sufficient to provide the beneficiary with a meaningful opportunity to ask any outstanding questions they might have, and as such, serve as a tool to reduce beneficiary confusion and increase comprehension of the required beneficiary notifications. Examples of appropriate modes of conducting this follow-up communication include disseminating it via secure patient portal, postal mail, or email, or outreach conducted via telephone or video visit. However, we reiterate that the follow-up communication may be provided in any manner, so long as the form of the follow-up communication includes a meaningful opportunity for beneficiaries to ask questions and engage with a representative of the ACO or ACO participant with regard to the beneficiary notice. We believe this provides a balance between educating beneficiaries and extending the flexibility to ACOs to implement the requirement in a manner that works well for their ACO.

Comment: We received one comment advocating that notifications for all assigned beneficiaries be made at the start of each agreement period and each new assigned beneficiary on a biannual basis by means of a letter through the electronic medical record (EMR) or patient portal and also have a hard copy available for each beneficiary to view at the practice on request.

Response: We appreciate the commenter's suggestion. However, we recognize that different ACOs have different IT infrastructures and that not all ACOs may be able to communicate with their assigned beneficiaries in the manner suggested (for example, beneficiaries may not choose to access their EMRs or patient portals). Accordingly, CMS is allowing ACOs flexibility in how to conduct these follow-up communications, including, but not limited to, communicating via EMR or patient portal.

Comment: A few commenters supported CMS' proposal to clarify that ACO participants are currently required to post signs in all facilities and make standardized written notices available upon request in all settings in which beneficiaries receive primary care services.

Response: We appreciate commenters' support of our proposal to clarify our signage requirement and to ensure that all beneficiaries who receive care in the facilities understand that the facility participates in an ACO.

Comment: One commenter contended that the ACO poster found in the ACO-MS Knowledge Library states, “for more details about our ACO, ask the front desk for a copy of the ACO beneficiary notice.” The commenter asked that CMS acknowledge that separate posters will be required. There would be one poster serving as notification in primary care locations to accommodate the “standardized written notices available upon request in all settings in which beneficiaries receive primary care services,” and a second poster for all other ACO participant facilities that do not provide primary care services and would be excluded from providing standardized written notices upon request.

Response: We appreciate the commenter's suggestions regarding providing setting-specific posters. We are working with our colleagues in the Office of Communications to improve the poster which includes removing references to the standardized written notice.

Comment: A few commenters did not agree with our proposals to reduce communication between ACOs and assigned beneficiaries and contended that such communication is critical to informed healthcare decision making by beneficiaries.

Response: Again, we appreciate commenters highlighting the importance of timely communications and beneficiary protections. We share the same goal to improve beneficiary awareness and comprehension of value based care and believe that our notification requirement with a follow-up communication will achieve this goal while reducing the potential for beneficiaries to misinterpret the notice as communicating a change regarding their health care services and coverage. We believe that reducing the frequency of beneficiary notifications will help to mitigate any potential concerns that their FFS benefits are changing. Further, we continue to require poster notifications be placed in all ACO participant facilities.

Comment: We received one comment explaining that some ACOs partner with specialist practices, which may include sites where no assigned beneficiaries are seen. This commenter relayed that requiring ACO-related signage at such sites would create confusion for beneficiaries and thereby impose burden on the specialist providers who must take time to explain the irrelevant signage. The commenter encouraged CMS to modify the policy and clarify that signage is required only in facilities where ACO-aligned beneficiaries receive care.

Response: We appreciate the commenter's suggestion. We disagree that a non-assigned beneficiary does not benefit from the knowledge that their provider is participating in an ACO. We believe all providers and suppliers participating in an ACO play important roles in coordinating care for beneficiaries. We believe it is appropriate for beneficiaries, including those not assigned to an ACO, to understand that their health care provider works with other health care providers and an ACO to improve the quality and experience of care practices, since those improved care practices may ultimately benefit all patients. While we understand that this may cause some confusion, we remain committed to working with the CMS Office of Communications to improve all communications, including signage, to use plainer language and ensure beneficiary comprehension.

Comment: We received one comment with a mixed opinion about the proposals, urging CMS to work with stakeholders to find a comprehensive workable solution to the ongoing burden, redundancy, and beneficiary confusion that arises in these instances.

Response: We appreciate the commenter's support and collaboration, and we commit to working to refine the required communications and signage to ensure that beneficiary protections are in place and that the content is clear and concise for all readers.

We appreciate the commenters' support and suggestions to modify the beneficiary notice requirements. For the reasons discussed above, we are finalizing our policies as proposed at § 425.312. Specifically, we are revising § 425.312(a)(2) to provide that the notifications required under § 425.312(a)(1) must be carried out through the following methods: (i) by an ACO participant posting signs in all of its facilities; (ii) by an ACO participant making standardized written notices available upon request in all settings in which beneficiaries receive primary care services; (iii) in the case of an ACO that has selected preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, by the ACO or ACO participant providing each FFS beneficiary with a standardized written notice at least once during an agreement period in the form and manner specified by CMS and prior to or at the first primary care service visit during the first performance year in which the beneficiary receives a primary care service from an ACO participant; and (iv) in the case of an ACO that has selected prospective assignment, by the ACO or ACO participant providing each prospectively assigned beneficiary with a standardized written notice at least once during an agreement period in the form and manner specified by CMS and during the performance year for which the beneficiary is prospectively assigned to the ACO; and (v) following the provision of the standardized written notice to a beneficiary, as specified in § 425.312(a)(2)(iii) and (iv) of this section, the ACO or ACO participant must provide a verbal or written follow-up communication to the beneficiary.

Additionally, under § 425.312(2)(v)(A), the follow-up communication must occur no later than the earlier of the beneficiary's next primary care service visit or 180 days from the date the standardized written notice was provided. Under § 425.312(2)(v)(B), The ACO must retain a record of all beneficiaries receiving the follow-up communication and the form and manner in which the communication was made available to the beneficiary; the ACO must make these records available to CMS upon request.

d. Streamline SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver Application Review Process

Under section 1861(i) of the Act, beneficiaries must have a prior inpatient hospital stay of no fewer than 3 consecutive days to be eligible for Medicare coverage of inpatient skilled nursing facility (SNF) care (the SNF 3-day rule). Section 1819(a) of the Act defines a SNF, in part, as an institution (or a distinct part of an institution) that is not primarily for the care and treatment of mental diseases but is primarily engaged in providing the following to residents: skilled nursing care and related services for residents who require medical or nursing care; or rehabilitation services for the rehabilitation of injured, disabled, or sick persons. The Medicare SNF benefit applies to beneficiaries who require a short-term intensive stay in a skilled nursing facility or rehabilitation facility, or both.

In the CY 2015 Shared Savings Program final rule (80 FR 32692), CMS used its authority under section 1899(f) to waive the SNF 3-day rule under section 1861(i) of the Act in order to carry out the provisions of section 1899 of the Act by offering ACOs that have accepted two-sided risk under the Shared Savings Program more flexibility under FFS Medicare to provide appropriate care for beneficiaries in the most appropriate care setting. We noted that we believe this is an opportunity to provide experienced, risk-bearing ACOs with additional flexibilities to increase quality and decrease costs.

The waiver is codified in the Shared Savings Program regulations at § 425.612(a)(1). Specifically, for PY 2017 and subsequent performance years, we waive the SNF 3-day rule for eligible beneficiaries that are assigned to an ACO participating in a two-sided model (or as provided in § 425.612(a)(1)(iv) during a grace period for beneficiaries excluded from prospective assignment to such an ACO) and who receive covered post-hospital extended care services furnished by an eligible SNF that has entered into a written agreement to partner with the ACO (a “SNF Affiliate”). An ACO is eligible to use the SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver if the ACO participates in performance-based risk (for example, Levels C, D, or E of the BASIC track or the ENHANCED track) and has a SNF affiliate list. All other statutory and regulatory provisions regarding Medicare Part A post-hospital extended care services continue to apply.

An eligible ACO may apply for a programmatic waiver of the SNF 3-day rule to allow its assigned beneficiaries to receive coverage for inpatient SNF care without a prior 3-day inpatient hospital stay when admitted to a SNF affiliate. A SNF affiliate is a SNF that has executed a written agreement with an eligible ACO that meets the requirements of § 425.612(a)(1)(iii)(B) and is included on the ACO's SNF affiliate list. If the SNF affiliate is eligible to be included in the CMS 5-star Quality Rating System, it must have and maintain an overall rating of 3 or higher (§ 425.612(a)(1)(iii)(A)).

It is important to note that the Shared Savings Program SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver does not create a new benefit or extend Medicare SNF coverage to patients who could be treated in outpatient settings or who require long-term custodial care. Also, the SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver does not restrict a beneficiary's choice of provider or supplier. A beneficiary will continue to have the option to seek care from any Medicare FFS provider or supplier, including from a SNF or other facility that is not an affiliate of an ACO participating in the Shared Savings Program. If a beneficiary that is assigned to an ACO chooses to receive care from a SNF or other facility that is not an affiliate of the ACO, normal Medicare requirements apply, including the requirement for a 3-day inpatient hospitalization. The SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver is intended to provide ACOs that are participating in certain performance-based risk tracks with additional flexibility to increase quality and decrease costs.

(1) SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver Application Process

An ACO participating or applying to participate in performance-based risk within the BASIC track under § 425.605 or the ENHANCED track under § 425.610 may request to use the SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver at the time of application to participate in the program or during its agreement period. The waiver request must be submitted in a form and manner and by a deadline specified by CMS, which typically occurs once each year. Any ACO, including those applying for the waiver during the term of an existing participation agreement, must apply during the annual application process. Current regulations require that an ACO submit an application demonstrating that it has the capacity to identify and manage beneficiaries who would either be directly admitted to a SNF or admitted to a SNF after an inpatient hospitalization of fewer than 3 days. Under § 425.612(a)(1)(i), to be eligible to use the SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver, an ACO must submit supplemental application materials that include, but are not limited to, a list of SNFs with whom the ACO will partner (that is, a SNF affiliate list), along with executed written SNF affiliate agreements between the ACO and each listed SNF, in addition to 3 narratives describing how the ACO plans to implement the waiver. The narratives must include: the communication plan between the ACO and its SNF affiliates, a care management plan for beneficiaries admitted to a SNF affiliate, and a beneficiary evaluation and admission plan approved by the ACO medical director and the healthcare professional responsible for the ACO's quality improvement and assurance processes.

Historically, the SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver originated from the CMS Innovation Center's Pioneer ACO and Next Generation ACO Models. These models included application questions (answered by the ACO in a narrative format) which, while not codified in regulation, were transformed into plan narrative requirements in the Shared Savings Program SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver application. In the CY 2015 Shared Savings Program final rule (80 FR at 32805), we discussed a variety of issues that could be addressed in these narratives, such as the protocol that will be followed by ACOs for evaluating and approving admissions to a SNF under the waiver and consistent with the beneficiary eligibility requirements and the education and training for eligible SNFs regarding waiver requirements. We have not set forth specific ways that ACOs must address issues in their plan narratives because we believe the ACO is in the best position to establish its protocols, develop SNF training, and otherwise determine how to best coordinate care for patients transferred to their SNF affiliates.

After successfully implementing the Shared Savings Program SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver for several performance years, we determined in 2017 that some application requirements were burdensome for both CMS and ACOs, did not add value to the application review, or were not permitted by regulation. For example, the SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver application originally included a narrative describing any financial relationships between an ACO, SNF affiliate and acute care hospital. Because the Shared Savings Program regulations do not prohibit ACOs or SNFs from having financial arrangements with acute care hospitals, nor do they require such arrangements, we discontinued the submission of this narrative. Previously, ACOs also submitted documentation for each proposed SNF affiliate demonstrating they met minimum star rating requirements. Because CMS could obtain the required star rating information directly from the CMS Care Compare website, this application submission requirement was discontinued. We removed the requirement for these two application elements in the CY 2018 PFS final rule (82 FR 52976).

At the time of these modifications, CMS chose to retain the three narratives related to an ACO's communication plan, care management plan, and beneficiary evaluation and admission plan without establishing specific criteria for an ACO's process for implementing the SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver. We have since found that these plan narratives have not aided in our ability to evaluate an ACO's capacity to identify and manage beneficiaries who may be admitted to a SNF affiliate beyond what is otherwise established within the application. These narratives describe the plans that exist and that the ACO will adhere to requirements for beneficiary eligibility set forth in the waiver, but the program continues to provide operational flexibility to ACOs to develop their own internal processes and protocols.

(2) Modify the CMS Review Process for ACOs Applying for a Shared Savings Program SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver

We remain committed to reducing unnecessary application and/or program burden where possible and consider application attestations as a way of streamlining processes when appropriate. The submission of the three remaining narratives has largely functioned as a mechanism for ACOs to confirm that they have established operations for communicating between the ACO and its SNF affiliates, establishing a care management plan, and beneficiary evaluation and admission plan. The existence of the three narrative plans provides some assurance of an ACO's capacity to identify and manage beneficiaries who may be admitted to a SNF affiliate. However, as a payer, we do not have the experience that would be required to evaluate the appropriateness of the contents of these plans. Therefore, to reduce CMS and ACO burden, we proposed to remove the requirement to submit the plan narratives and instead proposed to require ACOs to certify that they have a communication plan, care management plan, and beneficiary evaluation and admission plan in place prior to SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver approval. Such plans should continue to address the issues we previously discussed in the CY 2015 Shared Savings Program final rule at 80 FR 32805. ACOs must continue to develop robust processes to implement the 3-Day Rule Waiver and to successfully transition care for their identified FFS beneficiaries and must be able to provide upon request a narrative describing their communication plan, care management plan, and beneficiary evaluation and admission plan. We noted in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule that if our proposed policy is finalized, an ACO would be subject to compliance action if it fails to submit, upon CMS request, the narratives about its capacity to manage patients under the waiver. The proposed attestation requirement retains oversight for ensuring that an ACO has the capacity to identify and manage beneficiaries while reducing burden during the application process.

Furthermore, we have determined that other provisions of our regulations provide sufficient safeguards to ensure that CMS can assess an ACO's capacity to identify and manage beneficiaries who would be either directly admitted to a SNF or admitted to a SNF after an inpatient stay of less than 3 days. We also noted that we have found that these experienced, risk-bearing ACOs focus on care coordination and clinically-integrated, patient-centered care. Such investments in care coordination not only improve patient outcomes, but also serve to reduce the cost of care. In addition, our ongoing oversight and program compliance monitoring of the use of the waiver by ACOs helps us to ensure that ACOs have the capacity to identify and manage beneficiaries who are admitted to a SNF under the SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver.

In summary, we proposed to amend § 425.612(a)(1)(i)(A) to require that an ACO applying to use the SNF 3-Day Rule Waiver must submit an attestation that it has established plan narratives (communication plan, care management plan, and beneficiary evaluation and admission plan) and will make them available to CMS upon request. We proposed minor revisions to the narrative language by replacing “the communication plan” with “a communication plan” in § 425.612(a)(1)(i)(A)( 1 ). We noted that we expected that, when implemented, the proposal will reduce the application review burden on CMS, as well as the burden on ACOs to submit this information.

The following is a summary of the public comments received on the proposals to streamline the SNF 3-day rule waiver application review process and our responses:

Comment: In general, the majority of commenters supported efforts to reduce administrative burden on ACOs, including the proposed modifications to the SNF 3-day rule waiver application. One commenter indicated that this would enable ACOs to redirect these resources toward patient care. Another stated this would substantially reduce the amount of upfront documentation required for submission with ACO's application.

Response: We appreciate commenters' support of our proposal to remove the requirements for ACOs to submit plan narratives (communication plan, care management plan, and beneficiary evaluation and admission plan) with the SNF 3-day rule waiver application for CMS approval, and instead to attest that the plans are in place and can be made available to CMS upon request. We agree with commenters that this will reduce unnecessary administrative burden when ACOs apply for the waiver and will increase usability of this important ACO benefit for patients.

Comment: One commenter recognized that CMS intends to decrease administrative burden, and requested that CMS ensure that the final rule protects program integrity and beneficiary access to care.

Response: We appreciate the commenter sharing their concern for program integrity and beneficiary access to care. With respect to access to care, we note that we did not propose and are not finalizing any change to the SNF 3-day waiver provisions that affects beneficiary access to care. We believe this final rule adequately protects the integrity of the program by maintaining the requirement to have communication, care management, and beneficiary evaluation and admission plans and maintaining all other programmatic requirements regarding the SNF 3-day waiver, including the eligibility criteria for SNF Affiliates and the requirement that an ACO provider/supplier who is a physician must evaluate and approve a beneficiary's admission to a SNF Affiliate.

Comment: We received one comment urging CMS to eliminate the requirement at § 425.612(a)(1)(ii)(H), which requires an ACO provider/supplier who is a physician to have evaluated and approved the beneficiary for admission to a SNF affiliate within three days prior to the SNF admission.

Response: We appreciate the commenter's suggestion, but note that it is beyond the scope of our proposal. We continue to believe that the requirement set forth at § 425.612(a)(1)(ii)(H) is an important protection for beneficiaries and aids ACOs in coordinating care for their assigned beneficiaries. We believe that the ACO is in the best position to oversee the transfer of beneficiaries to SNFs or LTC settings.

Comment: One commenter urged CMS to not finalize the proposal. The commenter appreciated the intent to make it easier for ACOs to obtain a waiver but stated that beneficiaries are not provided sufficient information about how to use and benefit from the waiver and that the proposed changes will make it more, not less, difficult for those attributed to an ACO to access the SNF 3-day rule waiver. The commenter urged CMS to take additional measures to ensure that eligible beneficiaries are aware they can receive services covered by a waiver and stated their concern that there are instances where beneficiaries who go to a SNF without a prior three-day inpatient hospital stay do not have their SNF stay covered by Medicare and instead are required to pay out-of-pocket so the expenses are not attributable to the ACO.

Response: Nothing in our proposal or this final rule alters the beneficiary eligibility requirements for receiving SNF care under the waiver. It is important to note that not every beneficiary will be determined to meet the criteria to be admitted under the waiver, for example, a beneficiary must be medically stable and not require inpatient or further inpatient hospital evaluation or treatment, and this final rule does not make changes to those established criteria. Our final policy is limited to allowing ACOs to attest that they have developed a communication plan with its SNF Affiliates, care management plan, and beneficiary evaluation and admission plan when transferring eligible beneficiaries to a SNF, and that they can be made available to CMS upon request.

Comment: One commenter requested that we make additional SNF 3-day rule waiver utilization data publicly available in order to allow a fuller understanding of the potential impact of increasing access to the SNF 3-day rule waiver. The commenter also expressed interest in data which shows what, if any, impacts have been observed from waiving the three-day inpatient hospital stay requirement during the COVID-19 PHE.

Response: We appreciate this suggestion and are constantly reviewing Shared Savings Program data and frequently make updates to our publicly available reports. We will take this suggestion under advisement the next time we make updates.

Comment: Other commenters requested additional flexibility in the SNF 3-day rule waiver, and that waiver eligibility should be extended to ACOs in nonperformance-based risk tracks (BASIC track Level A and B) so that all ACOs have access to this a tool to manage costs and provide the right care at the most appropriate location. Another commenter requested CMS go further and eliminate the SNF 3-day qualifying inpatient stay requirement for long-term care nursing facility residents in an ACO.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' suggestions; however, we note that our policy modifications in this final rule were only intended to reduce the burden for ACOs when applying for SNF 3-day rule waivers and to promote the use of such waivers when and where they are authorized in our current policies. The commenters' suggestions are outside the scope of this rulemaking.

As a result of the discussion above and the support of commenters, we are finalizing without change our proposed policy to remove the requirement for ACOs to submit communication plan, care management plan, and beneficiary evaluation and admission plan narratives with a SNF 3-day rule waiver application. Specifically, we are revising § 425.612(a)(1)(i)(A) to require an ACO applying for the waiver to submit an attestation that it has established and will make available to CMS upon request communication, care management, and beneficiary evaluation and admission plan narratives describing how the ACO plans to implement the waiver.

e. Updating Shared Savings Program Data Sharing Regulations To Recognize ACOs Structured as Organized Health Care Arrangements (OHCAs) for Data Sharing Purposes

In the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65261), we stated that we were considering whether it would be appropriate to revise the regulations at §§ 425.702(c) and 425.704(b) to allow data sharing with a Shared Savings Program ACO that has structured its relationship with its ACO participants as an OHCA, as that term is defined in the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) regulations at 45 CFR 160.103. This was in response to commenters who shared concerns about collecting patient-level all-payer data (eCQMs/MIPS CQM) from patients who were not assigned to the ACO. These commenters cited HIPAA and patient consent concerns related to sharing non-Medicare patient information with the ACO and with CMS for a population that is not assigned to the ACO and indicated that obtaining this consent would be an additional burden.

We explained in the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65261) that we believed the disclosure of this all-payer data to CMS as required by § 414.1340(a) is permitted by the HIPAA Privacy rule under the provision that permits disclosures of protected health information (PHI) as “required by law.” 364 We also encouraged ACOs and their ACO participants to consult with their legal counsel as necessary to ensure that their business associate agreements (BAAs) address the need to share data for patients covered by all payers with the ACO to permit the ACO to comply with its legal obligation to completely and accurately report this data to CMS. Nevertheless, these comments prompted us to consider whether the current Shared Savings Program regulations provide sufficient flexibility regarding different arrangements permitted under HIPAA. In the CY 2022 PFS final rule, we stated that we were specifically considering potential revisions to the regulations at §§ 425.702(c) and 425.704(b) to permit data sharing with an ACO structured as an OHCA. We then proposed these changes in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46207 through 46208).

364 45 CFR 164.512(a).

As described in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, in the April 2011 proposed rule (76 FR 19528, 19556), we discussed the importance of data sharing and beneficiary protections in light of existing HIPAA requirements. We noted that ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers are also covered entities, provided they are health care providers as defined by 45 CFR 160.103 and they or their agents electronically engage in one or more HIPAA standard transactions, such as for claims, eligibility or enrollment transactions. We also stated that an ACO may itself be a HIPAA covered entity if it is a health care provider that conducts such transactions or may qualify as the business associate of its covered entity ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers based on the quality assessment and improvement activities that the ACO is conducting on behalf of those ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers (76 FR 19556). In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67846 through 67851), we established requirements for data sharing with ACOs that are designed around the HIPAA provisions for “health care operations” disclosures. These provisions permit CMS to disclose PHI without obtaining individual authorization for the health care operations activities of the recipient of the data (that is, the ACO). 365 As we explained in the CY 2015 PFS final rule (80 FR 32692), ACOs work with their ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers to evaluate their performance, conduct quality assessment and improvement activities, perform care coordination activities, and conduct population-based activities relating to improved health for their assigned beneficiary population. When done by or on behalf of a covered entity, these are activities that would qualify as health care operations under the first and second paragraphs of the definition of “health care operations” at 45 CFR 164.501 (76 FR 19558). Therefore, in the Shared Savings Program data sharing regulations at §§ 425.702(c)(2) and 425.704(b), we have focused on ACOs that are themselves HIPAA-covered entities, or that are acting as business associates on behalf of their ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers who are HIPAA-covered entities.

365 45 CFR 164.506(c)(4).

We stated in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule that we believed that most ACOs are acting as business associates of their covered entity ACO participants (the providers and suppliers that are part of the ACO). However, we noted that we believed it is possible that some ACOs may choose to operate as an OHCA.

An OHCA is another type of entity that is recognized under the HIPAA regulations. An OHCA is a distinct entity from a covered entity or a business associate under HIPAA, although it is made up of covered entities. As most relevant to Shared Savings Program ACOs, under 45 CFR 160.103, an OHCA is defined to include an organized system of health care in which more than one covered entity participates and in which the participating covered entities hold themselves out to the public as participating in a joint arrangement and participate in specified joint activities such as quality assessment and improvement activities and payment activities. 366 In addition, the purpose of the OHCA is that participants in such clinically integrated settings are able to share health information freely not only for purposes of care, but also to improve their joint operations (65 FR 82494). The HIPAA Privacy Rule has specific provisions relevant to OHCAs. For example, under 45 CFR 164.506(c)(5), a covered entity that participates in an OHCA may disclose PHI about an individual to other participants in the OHCA for any health care operations activities of the OHCA.

366 For the complete definition of an OHCA, see 45 CFR 160.103.

We noted that the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) and the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) have recognized in joint guidance that ACOs may operate as OHCAs. 367 An ACO that operates as an OHCA would be able to share PHI among the covered entities in the OHCA without getting authorization from individuals for the health care operations of the OHCA and would be permitted to share PHI for the health care activities of the OHCA without entering into BAAs with each other. 368

367 Permitted Uses and Disclosures: Exchange for Health Care Operations ( https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/exchange_health_care_ops.pdf ).

368 Please see HIPAA For Professionals FAQ 242 (Are covered entities that engage in joint activities under an organized health care arrangement (OHCA) required to have business associate contracts with each other?) ( https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/faq/242/may-i-share-protected-health-information-directly-with-another/index.html ).

We proposed to modify the Shared Savings Program data sharing regulations at §§ 425.702(c)(2) and 425.704(b) to specify that for PY 2023 and subsequent performance years, ACOs acting as OHCAs may request aggregate reports and beneficiary-identifiable claims data from CMS, respectively. We stated that these proposed changes would recognize an OHCA as an additional organizational structure under which an ACO can request data from CMS. We explained that our intention was to update the data sharing regulations to reflect how ACOs may be structured and provide flexibility with respect to the different arrangements permitted under HIPAA for purposes of data sharing.

Separately, we stated our belief that an OHCA structure potentially could address some of the concerns that commenters have raised about ACOs collecting and reporting all-payer data to CMS as required under the APP. However, we noted that the proposal was limited to the Shared Savings Program regulations governing CMS' data sharing with ACOs and was not intended to affect or modify any existing obligations under the HIPAA Privacy Rule. We also noted that it is the ACOs' responsibility to consult with their legal counsel and others as necessary to determine how to structure their arrangements with their ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers to comply with HIPAA requirements.

We received public comments on the proposal to update the Shared Savings Program data sharing regulations to recognize ACOs structured as OHCAs. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: A majority of commenters supported our proposal to modify the Shared Savings Program data sharing regulations at §§ 425.702(c)(2) and 425.704(b) to specify that ACOs acting as OHCAs may request aggregate reports and beneficiary-identifiable claims data from CMS, respectively. Several commenters stated that they supported this change because it would allow ACOs that operate as OHCAs to share the data needed to connect patients from across their delivery systems (urgent care, emergency department (ED), specialists) with primary care providers. One commenter supported the proposal and emphasized an interest in receiving as much data from CMS and in promoting as much transparency, as possible. Other commenters appreciated CMS' efforts generally to reduce administrative requirements for ACOs. One commenter explained that reporting, patient notification, and other administrative requirements cost ACOs staff time and financial resources and that the proposed modifications would minimize these requirements and enable ACOs to redirect resources toward patient care and reduce disincentives to participation in an ACO.

Response: We appreciate commenters' support for our proposed modifications to amend the Shared Savings Program data sharing regulations at §§ 425.702(c)(2) and 425.704(b) to specify that ACOs acting as OHCAs may request both aggregate reports and beneficiary-identifiable claims data. As we discussed in the proposed rule, these modifications will help ensure our data sharing regulations reflect how ACOs may be structured and provide flexibility with respect to different arrangements permitted under HIPAA for purposes of data sharing. We agree with the commenters that these changes may help ACOs improve operations, reduce administrative burden, increase opportunities for data sharing among ACO participants, and support transparency in Shared Savings Program data across the continuum of care.

Comment: Several commenters stated that while they supported the proposal, they disagreed that an OHCA structure would support all-payer quality reporting because, regardless of the structure used to comply with HIPAA (that is, business associate agreements versus OHCA), combining data across numerous EHR systems is an onerous process and EHR vendors are not yet equipped to support ACOs in this endeavor. These commenters asserted that they do not believe it is appropriate for CMS to assess ACOs' quality performance for patient populations outside of the ACO.

Response: We acknowledge the concerns raised by commenters about the challenges ACOs encounter when working across the multiple EHR systems used by their ACO participants. However, our proposed policy change was designed to ease the data sharing burden of ACOs that organize as OHCAs by ensuring that our regulations reflect how ACOs may be structured and provide flexibility with respect to the different arrangements permitted under HIPAA for purposes of data sharing. The proposed policy change was not intended to affect or modify any existing obligations under the HIPAA Privacy Rule. We recognize the commenters' concerns about reporting all-payer data, but we note that our proposed modification in section III.G.6 of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule was limited to the way in which ACOs may be structured for purposes of the Shared Savings Program data sharing regulations, and we did not propose any modifications to previously finalized policies with respect to quality reporting in that section of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule. Please see section III.G.4 of this final rule for a discussion of our proposed and final policies with respect to the quality performance standard and quality reporting requirements under the Shared Savings Program.

Comment: Another commenter supported the proposal and mentioned that it had ACOs that were organized as OHCAs in some States. This commenter stated that, while rare, there are instances in which State law conflicts with Federal laws governing data sharing and the lack of Federal guidance when those conflicts arise increases the costs of running an ACO because specialized legal counsel is needed, and this expense diverts investments into administration and away from population health.

Response: We understand that there may be conflicts that arise between State and Federal laws governing data sharing, but we note that the proposed modifications were limited to the Shared Savings Program regulations governing CMS' data sharing with ACOs and were not intended to affect or modify any existing obligations under the HIPAA Privacy Rule or other laws. We encourage ACOs to consult with legal counsel as necessary to determine how to comply with applicable Federal and State laws. While we acknowledge that ACOs may incur costs when consulting with legal counsel, we believe that these costs are worthwhile investments for ACOs to ensure compliance with Federal and State laws.

After considering the comments, we are finalizing, as proposed, our revisions to the Shared Savings Program data sharing regulations at §§ 425.702(c)(2) and 425.704(b) to specify that ACOs acting as OHCAs may request aggregate reports and beneficiary-identifiable claims data. Under this policy change, CMS will recognize an OHCA as an additional organizational structure under which an ACO can request data from CMS and the updated data sharing regulations will better reflect how ACOs may be structured and provide flexibility with respect to the different arrangements permitted under HIPAA for purposes of data sharing.

7. Responses to the Comment Solicitation on Incorporating an Administrative Benchmarking Approach Into the Shared Savings Program

a. Background on Longer Term Approach to Benchmarking Under the Shared Savings Program

We have set a goal that 100 percent of Original Medicare beneficiaries will be in a care relationship with accountability for quality and total cost of care by 2030. 369 Achieving this goal will require significant growth in the number of ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program, or the number of beneficiaries served by existing ACOs, or both. Benchmarks are a core policy instrument for providing sufficient incentives for ACOs to enter and remain in the Shared Savings Program, with significant implications on impacts to the Medicare Trust Funds.

369 Seshamani M, Fowler E, Brooks-LaSure C. Building On The CMS Strategic Vision: Working Together For A Stronger Medicare. Health Affairs. January 11, 2022. Available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/forefront.20220110.198444 .

The benchmark is a cost target used to determine savings or losses for an ACO compared to performance year expenditures for its assigned beneficiary population and, importantly, to create incentives for ACOs to reduce spending and generate savings, which will be shared by the ACO and CMS; by extension, these savings opportunities also create incentives for providers and suppliers to participate in ACOs. Many factors need to be considered in establishing benchmarks including the variability in the composition of ACOs, the beneficiary populations they serve, and their experience with accountable care models, as well as the need to protect the Trust Funds and minimize unintended consequences such as market consolidation and patient risk selection. In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46208 through 46217), we described and solicited comment on a modified benchmarking methodology that may boost participation, increase savings to the Medicare Trust Funds, and make long-term participation in the Shared Savings Program possible for more ACOs.

As explained in the proposed rule, we currently establish, adjust, update and reset the historical benchmark under the Shared Savings Program in accordance with § 425.601. An ACO's benchmark is established based on historical expenditures for a population of beneficiaries that would have been assigned to that ACO in the 3 years prior to the start of its agreement period. In establishing the benchmark, we adjust the benchmark based on the ACO's spending relative to its service area (referred to as the regional adjustment). For each performance year of the ACO's 5-year agreement period, we risk adjust the benchmark for changes in severity and case mix of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries, and we update the benchmark using growth rates that are a blend of observed national and regional FFS spending trends. We reset (or rebase) the ACO's benchmark at the start of the ACO's second and each subsequent agreement period. Refer to section III.G.5. of the proposed rule for a more detailed description of the statutory and regulatory background of the Shared Savings Program's current benchmarking methodology and certain benchmark calculations, as well as proposed modifications to the current benchmarking methodology for agreement periods starting on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

ACOs and other interested parties have expressed concerns about the effects of current benchmarking methods on ACOs' incentives to generate savings, the extent to which they are able to share in those savings, and thus the incentives for ACOs to enter and remain in the program over the long-term. Specifically, there are two ways in which the use of factors based on realized FFS spending (which reflects any ACO spending reductions) can lead to lower benchmarks, which we will refer to as “ratchet” effects: (1) downward pressure on an individual ACO's benchmark resulting from the impact of its achieved spending reductions on its historical benchmark expenditures, regional adjustment, and update factor; and (2) downward pressure on benchmarks due to program-wide spending reductions across all ACOs.

The first type of ratchet effect occurs at the individual ACO level, when an ACO's own savings reduce its benchmark, which can occur when we reset the historical benchmark at the start of the ACO's second or subsequent agreement period. When the benchmark years correspond to performance years from the ACO's preceding agreement period, the benchmark reflects a portion of any spending reductions achieved by the ACO. A ratchet effect can also occur through the use of factors based on the regional FFS expenditures to adjust the benchmark and update an ACO's benchmark; specifically, when an ACO reduces spending, it also reduces average spending in its region, thereby lowering the regional adjustment to its benchmark. This effect becomes more prominent as an ACO has increasing market share in its region. Critically, ACOs must be able to retain the ability to achieve savings over the long-term to have an incentive to take the steps necessary to generate them, as there are costs associated with delivering care outside of the FFS construct and in running an ACO to lower (and maintain) reduced spending levels.

The second type of ratchet effect occurs at the program level, where overall program success can apply downward pressure on ACOs' benchmarks through the method for updating benchmarks each performance year for changes in expenditures between Base Year 3 (BY3) and the performance year. We explained in the proposed rule that we currently determine the update factor retrospectively using a blend of realized national and regional FFS expenditure growth rates, which incorporates the collective impact of ACOs on spending across Original Medicare. As a greater portion of Medicare FFS beneficiaries are assigned to ACOs, this program level ratcheting effect increasingly diminishes incentives to participate in the Shared Savings Program. If all beneficiaries enrolled in the Original Medicare FFS program under Parts A and B were assigned to an ACO, calculating the update factor based on realized spending growth rates would necessitate that some ACOs would experience expenditure growth in excess of the update factor (and forgo shared savings), even if all ACOs reduced spending growth. That is, an ACO would have to reduce spending more than the average ACO in order to earn savings, all else equal (absent regional adjustments to historical benchmarks). Similarly, program-wide savings lower the average per capita amounts of expenditures for an ACO's regional service area which are used in computing the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark. As ACOs' benchmarks converge toward average realized FFS spending, approximately half of ACOs will necessarily be given benchmarks below their spending at the start of their current agreement period, even if all ACOs have generated spending reductions relative to the counterfactual (that is, what spending would have been without the ACO). This downward pressure of program success on benchmark updates means that ACOs collectively keep less of the savings they generate. In the context of CMS' strategic objective to increase the number of Medicare beneficiaries in a care relationship with quality and total cost of care accountability, we anticipate that this program level ratcheting effect will become more pronounced with the growth in the number of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs, further weakening incentives to participate in the Shared Savings Program with the potential for impeding progress towards the fulfillment of this same goal.

For illustrative purposes, consider a scenario in which all Original Medicare beneficiaries are receiving the plurality of their primary care from an ACO provider/supplier, and thus are assigned to an ACO. Assume that FFS expenditure growth in the absence of ACOs would be 5 percent each year, but that ACOs, on average, slow expenditure growth to 3 percent each year. Under the current benchmarking approach, the update factor applied to an ACO's benchmark would be 3 percent, matching the average overall FFS expenditure growth rate under 100 percent ACO penetration. However, because 3 percent is the average growth rate, there will be ACOs with both higher and lower growth rates than 3 percent, meaning that some ACOs' growth in expenditures will outpace their benchmarks, even if they reduced spending relative to the counterfactual. In this example, an ACO that limited expenditure growth to 4 percent would (ignoring regional adjustments to the benchmark) show losses, despite reducing spending relative to the 5 percent growth rate expected without ACOs. Figure 2 provides a visual example of this scenario.

MedPAC and researchers are also examining the Shared Savings Program benchmarking methodology and have noted many of the above concerns. MedPAC has discussed ratchet effects in ACO benchmarks in its November 2021 public meeting 370 and January 2022 public meeting, 371 with the general consensus that eliminating ratcheting effects is essential for the long-term sustainability of the Shared Savings Program. Many of the commissioners discussed a longer-term approach under which CMS would update ACOs' benchmarks annually using “exogenous” factors, meaning factors not impacted by the individual or collective performance of ACOs. Under this approach, which has also been referred to as administratively set benchmarks, benchmarks may be set prospectively based on projected growth in volume and intensity of FFS services, with guardrails in place to account for actual changes in FFS prices, demographics, and large projection errors. McWilliams, Chen, and Chernew have also raised concerns about ACO benchmark ratchet effects in outlining a blueprint for ACO benchmark changes in a recent white paper. 372

370 https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/aco-benchmarks-medpac-nov-2021.pdf ; https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/november21_medpac_transcript_sec.pdf .

371 https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/APM-MedPAC-Jan22.pdf ; https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Jan22_MedPAC_Meeting_Transcript_SEC.pdf .

372 https://www.brookings.edu/research/from-vision-to-design-in-advancing-medicare-payment-reform-a-blueprint-for-population-based-payments/ .

Addressing these ratchet effects may also improve the experience of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs. ACOs are incentivized through sharing savings to provide services to beneficiaries that may not have been traditionally reimbursed under Medicare FFS. However, because any costs incurred in providing such services are not reflected in observed FFS spending but may help to reduce that spending and thus result in the ratcheting down of future benchmarks, incentives to provide such services are diminished. As we stated in the proposed rule, we anticipate that addressing these ratchet effects under the current benchmarking methodology will allow ACOs and their ACO participants to provide additional services, and therefore, improve the beneficiary experience in ACOs.

We have used a variety of approaches to mitigate the effect of ACO performance on their historical benchmarks, as described in earlier rulemaking and as summarized in section III.G.5. of the proposed rule, including: adjusting the ACO's rebased benchmark to account for savings generated by the ACO in its prior agreement period (§ 425.603(b)(2), June 2015 final rule, 80 FR 32788 through 32791); subsequently replacing the prior savings adjustment with an approach that incorporated factors based on regional FFS expenditures in resetting the ACO's benchmark through a regional adjustment (§ 425.603(c) through (f), June 2016 final rule, 81 FR 37953 through 37991); in addition, more recent modifications to use blended national-regional growth factors to trend and update the ACO's historical benchmark help ameliorate the ACO-specific ratchet effect caused by the use of regional trends to update benchmarks in areas where ACOs contribute substantially to regional trends (§ 425.601(a)(5), (b), December 2018 final rule, 83 FR 68005 through 68030).

In particular, the regional adjustment has reduced the impact of rebasing by partially decoupling an ACO's benchmark from its prior savings performance. Importantly, this adjustment also begins to converge benchmarks toward a consistent basis within a region, which we believe is an important objective for creating equitable payment within a market that rewards ACOs for relative efficiency. However, recent experience suggests that the regional adjustment may have led to selective participation, with 80-87 percent of ACOs subject to a regional adjustment having spending below their region for PYs 2017 through 2020, as shown in Table 82. 373

373 https://data.cms.gov/medicare-shared-savings-program/performance-year-financial-and-quality-results .

Furthermore, as shown in Table 83, selective participation effects are stronger for ACOs subject to downside risk, with 92-100 percent of ACOs having positive regional adjustments. This suggests that as ACOs are required to participate under performance-based risk and higher levels of downside risk, these selective participation effects may continue to grow. Setting aside the net costs to the Trust Funds from subsidizing participation by ACOs with spending already below their region, the chief concern with this pattern of participation under the current methodology is that the providers/suppliers with the greatest savings potential (those with high spending relative to their region) have fewer incentives to participate.

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we explained that through the proposed benchmarking changes discussed in section III.G.5. of the proposed rule, we were seeking to more immediately address certain ratchet effects and features within the existing benchmarking methodology that result in selective participation. Specifically, we noted that the proposals to incorporate a prior savings adjustment, mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustment, and to modify the benchmark update to incorporate a prospective, external factor (ACPT) were intended to address these dynamics. In section III.G.7 of the proposed rule, we sought comment on broader changes to the benchmarking methodology that may be needed to further strengthen incentives for providers and suppliers to participate in the Shared Savings Program and generate savings while preserving a mechanism for convergence to a consistent regional benchmarking approach that does not elicit selective participation.

b. Administratively-Established Benchmarks as a Potential Solution To Address Benchmarking Concerns

In section III.G.7.b. of the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, we sought comment on a direction for future benchmarking that is designed to create a sustainable pathway for long term program savings for both ACOs and CMS and to address interested parties' concerns around ratcheting. We included an overview of and discussed details of key components of this potential approach.

This approach involves separating benchmarking update factors from realized FFS expenditure growth through the implementation of a prospective, administratively set annual growth rate to update benchmarks. Under this approach, benchmarks would be allowed to rise above realized FFS expenditure growth as ACOs generate savings, allowing ACOs to retain more of their savings and thus strengthening incentives to participate and achieve savings. Over time, use of this administratively set growth rate would allow for a wedge to accrue between average benchmarks and realized spending reductions, offering greater and more sustainable savings opportunities over the long-term for both Medicare and ACOs. Importantly, average benchmark growth would only exceed realized FFS spending growth to the extent that ACOs reduce spending, such that benchmarks remain at or below FFS spending levels projected in the absence of ACO participation. A graphic depiction of administratively-established benchmarking is provided in Figure 3.

We explained that in concert with shifting from a benchmark update based on observed, or realized, FFS expenditure growth to a prospectively set trend that does not ratchet benchmarks downward as ACOs slow observed FFS expenditure growth, we are considering approaches that would minimize rebasing effects between agreement periods.

An administratively set benchmarking approach also offers a path for converging benchmarks gradually towards a common risk-adjusted rate in each region, which we anticipate would mitigate selective participation and improve the savings potential of the program. Allowing benchmarks to remain above observed FFS spending as ACOs lower spending also allows convergence of benchmarks to a regional rate that is above average regional FFS spending. Accordingly, convergence would not require ACOs operating in the same region to outcompete each other to accrue savings and should not discourage participation by ACOs with above average observed spending to the same extent that they are discouraged under the present methodology. As long as ACOs are generating savings collectively, this approach would allow all ACOs a chance to earn shared savings while reducing overall spending relative to projections and protecting the Trust Funds. In addition, benchmarks that exceed FFS spending would give ACOs flexibility to meet beneficiary needs through alternative modes of care such as virtual care or care management programs that have not traditionally been reimbursed under FFS.

We further explained our belief that through the design of this approach, CMS could address the selective participation effects that currently discourage participation by ACOs with higher spending compared to their regional services area. For example, we noted that we are considering an approach that would remove the negative regional adjustment to ACO historical benchmarks. This approach would mean that an ACO with spending above its regional average would receive a historical benchmark set at the ACO's average historical FFS expenditures, rather than below its historical spending levels due to the negative regional adjustment.

We also stated that we envision such an approach would ultimately generate sufficient spending reductions for higher spending providers and suppliers such that CMS could consider a further modified benchmarking methodology under which ACOs' benchmarks would be calculated using a regionally consistent baseline. This longer-term option was discussed in section III.G.7.d. of the proposed rule. To maintain the divergence between benchmarks and realized FFS expenditures, regional baselines would be set to incorporate accrued FFS expenditure reductions relative to projected growth, rather than setting regional baselines at average FFS spending, which would effectively claw back the accrued savings. We noted that we consider regionally consistent benchmarks to be an important objective for the longer-term sustainability of the Shared Savings Program in that they would create equitable payment within a market by rewarding ACOs for their relative efficiency. Such an approach could also reduce complexity relative to both the current methodology (including the proposed changes described in section III.G.5. of the proposed rule) and the administratively established benchmark methodology used to generate convergence.

We invited comments on these concepts and on the design of an administratively established benchmarking methodology. We welcomed comments on the stages for implementing such an approach within the Shared Savings Program, particularly on an initial convergence phase and a post-convergence phase, and any other considerations related to this approach that we had not addressed in the proposed rule. We noted that any such modifications to the benchmarking methodology would need to be adopted through notice and comment rulemaking.

As we explained in the comment solicitation in the proposed rule, we are continuing to consider the financial impact of this modified approach and are also considering other modifications to the design of the Shared Savings Program that may be needed along with an administratively established benchmarking methodology, including potential changes to the program's participation options and financial models (level of risk and potential reward). We sought comment on any additional modifications to the design of the Shared Savings Program that should be considered in conjunction with administratively set benchmarks.

Lastly, we noted that a number of the features of an administratively established benchmarking methodology diverge from the benchmarking requirements under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act and would require the use of our authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act. Under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act, in order to use a payment model other than the payment model described in section 1899(d) of the Act, we must determine that the alternative payment methodology will improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries, without resulting in additional program expenditures. Accordingly, we also sought comment on the extent to which the use of administratively set benchmarks might have the potential to improve the quality and efficiency of care furnished to Medicare beneficiaries and any anticipated impact on Medicare expenditures. We noted that we would consider the information submitted as part of any determination of whether to propose in future rulemaking to implement aspects of an administratively-established benchmarking methodology in the Shared Savings Program.

c. Establishing an Administrative Benchmark Update Factor

(1) Overview

As we explained in the comment solicitation in the proposed rule, under the administratively-established benchmarking concept, we would continue to utilize an ACO's historical FFS expenditures to establish the ACO's historical benchmark. However, we would modify the existing methodology to fully remove negative regional adjustments to the benchmark. We noted that we would otherwise retain much of the existing methodology for calculating the historical benchmark, including, if finalized, the proposed changes detailed in section III.G.5. of the proposed rule.

When setting the historical benchmark, we would continue to calculate the annualized and truncated per capita expenditures for beneficiaries who would have been assigned to the ACO using the 3 most recent years prior to the start of the agreement period for each of the four Medicare enrollment types. We would then trend the BY1 and BY2 expenditures forward to BY3, using the existing blend of national and regional FFS expenditure growth rates, adjust for health risk using the CMS-HCC model, and apply benchmark year weights to the trended, risk-adjusted expenditures for each Medicare enrollment type. The benchmark year weights would remain as follows: for new ACOs, BY1 (10 percent), BY2 (30 percent), BY3 (60 percent), and for ACOs in their second or subsequent agreement period, each benchmark year is weighted equally.

As described in the comment solicitation, we would apply an alternative approach to annually updating the ACO's historical benchmark, using an OACT-projected ACPT factor, and applying a discount to the benchmark update to support savings to the Medicare program; the discount factor would vary based on the ACO's regional efficiency to converge benchmarks gradually between ACOs with higher and lower spending compared to their regions. We also further explained that with the use of a discount factor, we would no longer apply a negative regional adjustment. We also provided an overview of the steps for the calculation for the administratively-established benchmark update factor.

(2) Use of Accountable Care Prospective Trend in the Benchmark Update

As explained in the proposed rule, we are considering an approach that would transition from a three-way blend between the prospective ACPT and retrospectively determined regional and national growth rates (as described in section III.G.5.c. of the proposed rule) to an entirely prospectively set trend. This approach would further decouple benchmark updates from growth in realized FFS expenditures, thereby strengthening incentives for ACOs to participate in the Shared Savings Program and achieve savings.

OACT annually develops and publishes United States Per Capita Cost (USPCC) growth projections for Medicare spending. As described in section III.G.5.c. of the proposed rule, under the three-way blended update factor OACT would calculate an ACPT, based on a modification of the existing USPCC growth projections used annually for establishing Medicare Advantage rates. However, as discussed in the proposed rule, we envision that an ACPT, with some additional modifications as described below, would serve as the core component of the administratively set benchmark update under the potential longer-term approach.

As we explained in the comment solicitation in the proposed rule, we are considering how to calculate and apply the ACPT in a manner that maintains a consistent national benchmark update trend across ACOs for a given performance year, independent of when the ACO's agreement period began. We are considering an approach under which we would establish an ACPT every 5 years which would apply during that 5-year window. For example, if we were to establish an average annual trend for the years 2025 through 2029, we would then calculate a new average annual trend for the years 2030 through 2034, then for 2035 through 2039, and so on for each subsequent period. 374 An ACO's update factor for a given performance year would be derived from the average annual trend established for the 5-year window that includes the applicable performance year.

374 ACPT 5-year growth projection trends include different growth rates for each year within the 5-year projection. However, for the purposes of simplicity, the overall average annualized growth rate over the 5-year period would be utilized, such that the growth rate is constant over each of the 5 years. Price and demographic projections would be considered at an annual level for the purposes of the adjustment for forecasting error.

For example, an ACO beginning its 5-year agreement period in 2025 would have a single update factor trend for all performance years under the agreement period. For illustration, Table V.D1 from the 2021 Medicare Trustees Report 375 projects overall per capita spending growth for Medicare Parts A and B at an annualized rate of 5.1 percent from a 2024 base year to what would be a fifth performance year in 2029. Note that this projected spending growth serves as an illustrative proxy for what a corresponding ACPT might show, though it is based on a different methodology that is not customized to the mix of spending categories included in Shared Savings Program benchmark calculations. In contrast, an ACO beginning its 5-year agreement period in 2027 would have one trend rate for its first 3 performance years (2027, 2028, and 2029) and another for its last 2 performance years (2030 and 2031), as the update factor would be reset every 5 calendar years. This update factor would not change for the duration of the 5-year period in response to changes to the OACT projection, with the exception of an adjustment for changes to the price and demographic components of the ACPT trend, or to account for extreme and uncontrollable circumstances. We noted that we would plan to continue to apply the update factor as a flat dollar, risk-adjusted amount, consistent with the methodology for the use of ACPT in a three-way blend described in section III.G.5.c. of the proposed rule.

375 https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2021-medicare-trustees-report.pdf .

We also noted that we are considering further refinements to calculating the ACPT as part of a longer-term approach for updating benchmarks using entirely administratively set update factors. For example, we are considering maintaining separate projections within the ACPT for price growth, volume/intensity growth, and demographic factors (with potential exceptions for certain service types such as Part B drugs, which are not currently projected using disaggregated growth assumptions). This disaggregation of these factors could be utilized in ACO benchmark updates (for service types where possible), as ACOs are anticipated to have impacts on volume/intensity growth but have minimal impact on price growth and demographic factors. Therefore, the ACPT volume-intensity trend would be held constant for the duration of the agreement period, but retrospective adjustments could be made annually to account for any differences between projected and actual price growth and demographic factors. This would mitigate the effects of unexpected changes in assignable beneficiary demographics, as well as of inflationary pressures or other price changes on ACOs benchmarks. We would also incorporate adjustments to the ACPT to account for changes in relative price levels across counties, as has been done in other ACO initiatives that use national trend projections, such as the Next Generation ACO Model.

By incorporating annual adjustments for changes in price and demographics, we expect that the administrative growth projection will exceed the observed volume/intensity growth, as ACOs generate savings relative to the growth projection. However, we are considering adding potential guardrails to the administrative growth projection in early years to ensure that forecasting error does not unfairly penalize ACOs or discourage participation. One option would be to phase-in the administrative trend over the first 5 years, increasing the weighting of the administrative trend component of the update in the three-way blend calculation from 33 percent in PY1 to 50 percent in PY2, 75 percent in PY3, and 100 percent thereafter. Another option would be to limit the contribution of forecasting error to savings and loss calculations during the first 5 years of the new methodology. For example, a floor could be set such that the national mean benchmark could not fall more than 2 percent below national mean FFS spending. We noted that CMS may consider applying either or both of these guardrail options as part of a prospectively-set update factor.

In section III.G.5.c. of the proposed rule, we proposed to adopt a prior savings adjustment with a 50 percent scaling factor for renewing and re-entering ACOs. In the comment solicitation, we explained that this proposed change together with the changes to the benchmark update described in the comment solicitation would act to limit the impact of an ACO's performance on its own benchmark. We also noted that increasing the 50 percent scaling factor for prior savings adjustments could be considered to further limit the impact of rebasing. The prospective update factor would remove this link within an agreement period and the prior savings adjustment would mitigate the impact of rebasing between agreement periods. We further explained that after benchmarks converge to a regional baseline (as discussed in section III.G.7.d. of the proposed rule), the link between an ACO's savings and its subsequent benchmark would be severed completely. We stated that we anticipated these changes would create and improve long-term incentives for ACOs to generate savings.

In the comment solicitation, we noted that we would also need to establish a process for considering additional factors when recalculating the ACPT prospective update factor every 5 years. We explained that one factor may be the size of the accrued wedge between benchmarks and realized FFS spending. It is vital that ACOs are permitted to retain savings in subsequent agreement periods for there to be a strong incentive to generate savings. Allowing a permanent wedge between benchmarks and FFS spending is also vital to giving ACOs flexibility to meet patient needs by providing care that has been traditionally unreimbursed under FFS, such as care management programs or services addressing social needs. Should this wedge grow excessive, however, the update trend may need to be slowed to recover more savings for the Medicare program and its beneficiaries. Over time, updated OACT ACPT projections would also come to reflect the impact of ACOs on spending, and therefore, we may need to use other external indices as factors in determining the preset benchmark update factor to ensure that ACOs continue to retain accrued savings.

We sought comment on these considerations for calculating an ACPT to be used as an administratively set benchmark update factor. We sought comment on the 5-year intervals for establishing an ACPT, and alternative approaches that would tie the ACPT to an ACO's agreement period. We also sought comment on approaches to accounting for price growth and demographic factors versus volume/intensity and considerations for guardrails to protect against projection error. Finally, we sought comment on approaches to updating the ACPT that would ensure it does not overly reflect ACOs' collective impact on spending.

(3) Discount Factor

As we explained in the comment solicitation, under the approach we are considering for implementing a common risk-adjusted regional benchmark (described in section III.G.7.d. of the proposed rule) that encourages participation by both historically efficient (spending below regional average) and inefficient (spending above regional average) ACOs, we believe there would need to be a period of gradual convergence in spending between efficient and inefficient ACOs, while allowing benchmarks for both to remain above realized FFS spending as ACOs generate savings. Therefore, we sought comment on the approach of subtracting a modest annual discount factor from the fixed 5-year ACPT growth trend based on the relative efficiency of the ACO. For example, if the projected ACPT trend was 5.1 percent annual growth, an ACO with a 0.2 percent discount factor would have a benchmark update factor based on a 4.9 percent annual growth rate (5.1 percent minus 0.2 percent). Overall, these discount factors would be intended to provide realistic targets that encourage participation by ACOs and providers and suppliers with spending above their regional average. Once in the program, these ACOs and providers and suppliers would have incentives to generate savings, and thus, gradually converge their spending more in line with historically lower spending ACOs.

We noted that to determine the discount that would be applied to an ACO's update factor, we would calculate a measure of the ACO's regional efficiency. We would compare the ACO's historical spending (the weighted-average spending for the ACO in benchmark year 3 to a regional benchmark (the weighted-average regional FFS expenditures for benchmark year 3). This calculation would be similar to the approach used to determine the difference between the average per capita expenditures for the ACO's regional service area, and the average per capita amount of the ACO's historical benchmark under § 425.601(a)(8)(ii)(A). The discount would vary according to the regional efficiency of each participating ACO but, importantly, would not grow if an ACO successfully lowers spending (as it would under the current regional adjustment methodology). Sample discount factors are shown in Table 84. If an ACO's historical spending was greater than its regional benchmark, we would apply a discount to the amount of the benchmark update, scaled such that a larger discount is applied for ACOs with increasingly higher spending (less efficient) compared to their regional benchmark. No discount would be applied to the update amount for ACOs with spending 2 percent or more below their regional benchmark. Applying larger discount factors to less efficient ACOs would converge benchmarks towards regionally consistent levels, allowing CMS to remove negative regional adjustments as discussed in section III.G.7.c.(4) of the proposed rule while still driving convergence.

As we stated in the comment solicitation, we have observed that ACOs make significant changes in composition of ACO participant TINs during an agreement period, by adding and removing ACO participants. To account for ACO participant TIN changes, we would recalculate the ACO's discount factor for each performance year of the agreement period based on its regional efficiency using the composition of its ACO participant TINs for the applicable performance year. That is, we would use the ACO's certified ACO participant list for the performance year to determine the ACO's historical spending based on expenditures for the beneficiaries who would have been assigned to the ACO in benchmark year 3 and determine the ACO's regional service area for calculating the ACO's regional benchmark, and thus its regional efficiency.

We sought comment on this approach for calculating and applying a discount factor in determining the amount of an ACO's benchmark update. We sought comment on the intervals of the discount we described, and alternative approaches such as use of a sliding scale in determining the discount amount. We also sought comment on approaches to ensuring the discount is reflective of the ACO's regional efficiency, including the approach of recalculating the discount factor to reflect changes in an ACO's regional efficiency as a result of changes in the ACO's composition during its agreement period.

(4) Removal of Negative Regional Adjustments to the Benchmark

In accordance with § 425.601(a)(8), we currently apply a regional adjustment in establishing the ACO's historical benchmark, which is equal to a percentage of the difference between the average per capita amount of expenditures for the ACO's regional service area for BY3 and the ACO's historical benchmark.

In the comment solicitation, we explained that under the administratively-established benchmarking concept we would no longer apply negative regional adjustments to the benchmark, although positive regional adjustments would remain. Under this approach, ACOs with higher than average historical spending would begin with a benchmark calculated solely using their historical experience. This would encourage providers and suppliers with higher historical spending relative to their region to participate in the Shared Savings Program, while continuing to reward ACOs with lower-than-average historical spending for their efficiency relative to their region. We explained that this approach would build on the policies proposed in section III.G.5.c.(5) of the proposed rule to mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustment on ACOs, particularly those caring for high-risk populations.

As discussed in the comment solicitation in the proposed rule, we are also considering approaches for addressing a potential concern that efficient ACOs would be disincentivized from adding less efficient providers and suppliers as ACO participants because it would reduce their regional adjustment. One approach would be to scale an ACO's initial, larger positive regional adjustment based on the overlap in beneficiaries that would have been aligned to the ACO using the ACO's initial ACO participant list and its updated ACO participant list. In this way, an ACO with spending below its regional average would retain its advantage conferred by the regional efficiency adjustment under its initial ACO participant list (to the extent it retains those ACO participants) while also being able to pursue the expanded savings opportunity afforded by the new benchmarking approach by adding less efficient providers and suppliers to its ACO participant list.

We sought comment on this approach, and considerations related to removing the negative regional adjustment in establishing the ACO's historical benchmark under an administratively-established benchmark approach. We also sought comment on considerations for limiting disincentives for efficient ACOs to add less efficient providers and suppliers.

(5) Detailed Administratively-Established Benchmark Update Calculation

The following is a step-by-step example of the administratively-established benchmark update calculation on which we sought comment:

• Step 1: Calculate the historical benchmark according to the existing Shared Savings Program benchmarking methodology (including, if finalized, the proposed changes detailed in section III.G.5. of the proposed rule), without applying negative regional adjustments.

• Step 2: Risk-adjust the historical benchmark to account for changes in severity and case mix between BY3 and the performance year for each enrollment type.

• Step 3: Apply the update factor to the risk-adjusted historical benchmark for each enrollment type, calculated as follows:

++ Start with the overall OACT-projected Shared Savings Program ACPT 5-year projected trend 376 applicable for the ACO based on the start of its agreement period and the performance year for each enrollment type. 377 The update rate over an agreement period may include ACPT projected trends from more than one 5-year period if the ACO's agreement period does not align with the 5-year cycle for ACPT calculation.

376 As described in section III.G.5.c. of the proposed rule, we proposed that OACT would develop a Shared Savings Program-specific ACPT to incorporate into the update factor calculation. This projected trend would vary from the USPCC projections designed for MA payment purposes in that adjustments would be made to make it applicable to ACO spending calculations, including adding back hospice and removing IME, DSH, and uncompensated care payments (as is already done for benchmarking under the Global and Professional Direct Contracting Model and will continue when the model transitions to the redesigned ACO REACH Model on January 1, 2023).

377 The ACPT would include trends for Aged & Disabled (A&D) and End Stage Renal Disease (ESRD) beneficiaries. The Aged & Disabled trend would apply for the disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible enrollment types.

++ Apply the average projected trend based on the number of years between BY3 and the performance year.

++ Apply any retrospective adjustments to the trend based on divergence between the price and demographic components of the ACPT projected trend and observed price trends and demographic changes. This retrospective adjustment would be calculated annually after the end of each performance year only for the price and demographic components (no such adjustment would be made for the volume-intensity component).

++ Subtract the relevant discount factor (as per the examples in Table 84, based on the regional efficiency of the ACO in BY3) from the adjusted trend for each year between BY3 and the performance year to determine the ACO's trend percentage.

++ Multiply the ACO's trend percentage by the average national ACPT value for assignment eligible beneficiaries (adjusted to reflect the ACO's relative risk in each eligibility category) to determine the flat dollar update amount.

++ Apply any guardrails as described in section III.G.7.c.(2) of the proposed rule.

++ Add the flat dollar update amount to the ACO's risk-adjusted historical benchmark for the applicable enrollment type.

• Step 4: Calculate a single per capita benchmark amount by taking a weighted average across each enrollment type.

d. Convergence to Regional Benchmarks; Post-Convergence Phase

As we explained in the proposed rule, this administratively-established benchmark approach would be partially intended to drive ACOs towards regional spending convergence, such that the Shared Savings Program could consider further benchmarking changes under which benchmarks would be established on a regionally consistent risk-adjusted basis across ACOs in the same area. This post-convergence phase would completely eliminate ratcheting effects by removing rebasing and would also decouple benchmarks from an ACO's historical spending, thereby creating a sustainable benchmarking approach that would support high ACO participation levels and reward ACOs for increased efficiency.

We noted that regionally consistent benchmarking has precedent in other CMS models and programs. Medicare Advantage benchmarks are established using beneficiary risk scores and the Medicare Advantage Ratebook of county risk-standardized benchmarks, as described in §§ 422.258 and 422.306. In the ACO REACH Model, 378 the baseline component of the benchmark will be calculated either entirely or in part using a rate book with county benchmark expenditures and beneficiary risk scores. The Shared Savings Program calculates risk-adjusted county FFS expenditures for individual calendar years using a comparable approach, as discussed in section III.G.5.d. of the proposed rule.

378 See the ACO REACH Request for Applications at https://innovation.cms.gov/media/document/aco-reach-rfa .

Under the administratively-established benchmark approach under consideration, ACO benchmarks in this post-convergence phase would be calculated based on a rate book of risk-standardized average per capita rates at the county level and beneficiary level risk scores. Crucially, the initial per capita county rates would reflect the average benchmark levels in the county, inclusive of the accrued wedge between benchmarks and realized spending, as opposed to reflecting average expenditures. An ACO's benchmark would be the product of its average beneficiary risk score, weighted by assigned beneficiary months, and its average regional benchmark rate, calculated as the weighted average of the county rates, weighted by the number of months of experience contributed by assigned beneficiaries residing in each county. The administratively set update factor would continue to be applied to ACO benchmarks in the post-convergence phase to determine average benchmark growth. As an example, say an ACO has assigned beneficiaries that reside entirely in two counties (County A and County B), with 50 percent of the assigned beneficiary population in each county. If the rate book rate for County A is $1,300 per beneficiary per month (PBPM) and the rate for County B is $1,100 PBPM, then the ACO's average regional benchmark rate would be $1,200 PBPM. If the ACO's assigned beneficiaries have an average risk score of 1.5, then the risk-adjusted benchmark would be $1,800 PBPM, pending application of the update factor. This regionally consistent benchmarking approach would likely involve an annual determination of county rates tied to the publication of the rate book.

As we explained in the comment solicitation in the proposed rule, the convergence phase would be intended to converge benchmarks toward some level above realized spending, but below predicted spending absent ACOs, assuming ACOs generate savings. We also noted that we are considering several approaches for developing county per capita rates. One method under consideration would be to calculate risk-standardized average per capita expenditures and apply a scalar adjustment that accounts for prior savings or the accrued wedge. Alternatively, another approach could involve developing county rates by calculating a weighted average benchmark across ACO-assigned and unassigned beneficiary populations in the county. In either case, we would continue to use an administratively-established factor to update county rates over time; however, we anticipate the need for a process to monitor the size of the wedge within a region (the risk-adjusted difference between the benchmark and FFS spending) and to establish bounds that restrict regional rates from exceeding a certain level above FFS spending.

We further explained that we anticipate that the convergence phase would last between 5-10 years, depending on participation rates and the pace of spending convergence within regions. We noted that we expect ACO spending will converge within regions under the changes described in the comment solicitation because the incentives for providers and suppliers with high spending for their region to participate in ACOs and lower spending would be much stronger, and the ACOs in which those providers and suppliers participate would have strong savings potential. Convergence in risk-adjusted spending may also be fostered by improvements to the risk adjustment methodology. Convergence in spending would not have to be complete, however, to transition to a post-convergence phase in which benchmarks are set based on a common regional rate that is risk-adjusted for an ACO's aligned population characteristics. We noted that we would expect some continued variation in ACO spending, but the convergence to regional rates would still provide all ACOs an opportunity to lower spending below their benchmarks. Still, we acknowledged that the timing for transitioning to the post-convergence phase is important, as it may cause a significant shift in benchmarks for many ACOs as the baseline component shifts from population-specific to regionally consistent. In order to maintain participation, it would be essential that this phase does not occur until a sufficient portion of providers are below the administratively projected regional benchmark.

If the convergence phase takes longer than 5 years, we noted that we would need to address the potential rebasing effects for ACOs renewing for subsequent agreement periods under the new benchmarking approach. One approach would be to completely eliminate rebasing and use the historical benchmark period from an ACO's first agreement period under the new benchmarking approach for subsequent agreement periods until the post-convergence phase. This approach would most directly eliminate rebasing effects but would risk weakening the accuracy of the historical baseline expenditures as the number of years separating the baseline period and performance year increases. In prior rulemaking, we have acknowledged concerns about an approach that depends on older historical data in benchmark calculations (see, for example, February 2016 proposed rule, 81 FR 5832 through 5834, 5865 and 5866), including operational complications and potential biases that result from use of older historical data when the ACO's composition of providers and suppliers changes over time. These complicating circumstances may become more pronounced with a longer convergence period and a larger gap between the historical benchmark and performance period. An alternative approach would be to continue to use a baseline period of 3 years directly proceeding the start of the agreement period, but with ACO-specific adjustments to limit rebasing effects. As an example of this type of ACO-specific adjustment, we noted that we are considering approaches that would build on the proposal, discussed in section III.G.5.c. of the proposed rule, to add prior ACO savings into subsequent benchmarks, with weighting to address changes in ACO composition.

We sought comment on—

• Considerations for the design of a regionally consistent benchmarking approach, including how to set fair and accurate risk-standardized benchmarks, the process for annual updates to regional rates, and how to distinguish between enrollment types.

• Considerations for the required conditions and timing for reaching this post-convergence phase with the use of regionally consistent benchmarks, as well as incentives to promote ACO spending convergence within a region.

• Approaches to addressing rebasing effects for renewing and re-entering ACOs in subsequent agreement periods during the convergence phase.

• Considerations for converging to nationally consistent spending versus regionally consistent spending.

The following is a summary of the public comments received in response to the Comment Solicitation on Incorporating an Administrative Benchmarking Approach into the Shared Savings Program and our responses:

Comment: The vast majority of commenters expressed support for the concept of utilizing a prospective, administratively set benchmark in the Medicare Shared Savings Program. These commenters expressed the need to address the ratchet effect, through which ACOs' benchmarks are impacted by the individual and collective savings generated by ACOs and noted that administratively-set benchmarks were an appropriate mechanism to address these effects. Several commenters noted that an administrative benchmarking approach would be a necessary step to achieve CMS' stated goals of substantial growth in the number of Medicare beneficiaries under accountable care relationships.

In the context of support for the overall approach, many commenters shared considerations for implementation of an administrative benchmarking approach. Additionally, numerous commenters urged CMS to engage with stakeholders in the development of these new benchmarking methodologies.

Several commenters expressed concerns that a national administratively-set benchmark trend would not adequately account for regional variation in spending growth trends. These commenters urged CMS to consider regional adjustments to the administratively-set benchmark trends. One commenter recommended implementing a glidepath to administrative benchmarks to mitigate short-term windfall gains/losses due to regional spending variations or forecasting errors.

Commenters expressed differing views on the timing of a transition to an administrative benchmarking methodology. Several commenters expressed urgency in implementing this benchmarking methodology, citing the growing impact of the ratchet effect and a desire to grow the Medicare Shared Savings Program. Other commenters noted that while this administrative benchmarking methodology was an appropriate long-term goal, there was no urgent need to move to administrative benchmarks, noting that CMS is still able to set Medicare Advantage benchmarks based on FFS spending data in regions with high Medicare Advantage penetration. Two commenters specifically questioned the timing of introducing administrative benchmarks given volatility introduced by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Multiple commenters specifically commented on the possibility of applying a variable discount rate to the benchmark trend according to an ACO's risk-adjusted spending relative to its region. Most of these commenters supported this approach, stating that variable discount factors would allow for gradual convergence to a common regional benchmark while not discouraging ACO participation. One commenter was opposed, stating that discount factors were not appropriate for the Shared Savings Program.

Multiple commenters expressed support for the concept of allowing for retrospective adjustments to an administrative benchmark based on observed changes in regional prices and demographics only. These commenters noted such adjustments may address concerns about the accuracy of an administratively set benchmark. No commenters expressed concerns about such price adjustments.

Many commenters indicated that the development of a wedge in which the administratively-set benchmark remains at a level above observed FFS spending would be critical to the success of this benchmarking approach. Some of these commenters expressed concern that this wedge may be reduced in the future, either through future rulemaking or congressional action. These commenters urged CMS to provide assurances that an administrative benchmarking approach would remain stable over time and provide transparency into what would lead to changes in the benchmark calculation.

Several commenters encouraged CMS to consider how an administrative benchmarking approach would interact with the Medicare Advantage program. These commenters urged CMS to utilize administrative benchmarking to achieve “parity” between FFS and Medicare Advantage reimbursement, but did not specify what this would entail. One commenter suggested that CMS consider utilizing price trends in Medicare Advantage in calculating the administrative benchmark.

One commenter expressed concern that an administrative benchmark based on the USPCC may artificially inflate benchmarks, given this commenter's assertion that the USPCC has systemically overestimated spending in the past. This commenter also encouraged CMS to remove shared savings payments from the calculation of any administrative benchmark trend.

One commenter urged CMS to consider whether legislative changes to the Shared Savings Program's statutory authority would be needed to allow for an administrative benchmarking approach, and whether CMS would be able to set benchmarks based on factors other than cost trends in FFS Medicare under the existing authority.

Another commenter suggested that a separate benchmarking approach would be required for very high cost, high needs populations, and questioned whether converging to a common regional risk-adjusted benchmark would be possible in this patient population. Two commenters encouraged CMS to consider alternative payment methodologies such as a capitated primary care payment in conjunction with an administrative benchmarking approach. Additionally, while not in response to the administrative benchmarking request for information but the proposed rule generally, one commenter cited the recent National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) report 379 and suggested CMS use the authority in section 1899(i) of the Act to include a hybrid payment—part fee-for-service and part prospective capitated payment—in the Shared Savings Program to better support primary care.

379 https://nap.nationalacademies.org/read/25983/chapter/1 .

Response: We appreciate these thoughtful comments in response to our comment solicitation on incorporating an administrative benchmarking methodology in the Shared Savings Program. We will consider these comments in the development of policies for future rulemaking. We note that some of these comments are similar to those received in response to our proposal to incorporate the ACPT into the Shared Savings Program. In response to both the proposal to incorporate the ACPT into the Shared Savings Program and the comment solicitation on incorporating an administrative benchmarking approach, commenters expressed overall support for the ACPT, but shared concerns that basing the ACPT solely on national spending trends may not adequately account for geographic variation in spending trends that are outside of ACOs' control. Commenters recommended applying regional adjustments to the ACPT. However, comments received in response to the comment solicitation also addressed the use of variable discount factors applied to the ACPT and convergence to a regionally consistent risk-adjusted rate. Most commenters expressed support for the use of variable discount factors as a means to drive gradual convergence to a common regional benchmark. Although these comments are outside the scope of the proposed changes to the benchmarking methodology discussed in section III.G.5.c.(3), we may consider them in the development of policies for future rulemaking. Please see section III.G.5.c.(3) of this final rule for CMS' response to comments on the proposal to incorporate the ACPT as part of a three-way blended update factor.

e. Responses to Comment Solicitation on Addressing Health Equity Through Benchmarking

In the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46217 and 46218), we explained that consistent with the Executive Order on Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government (E.O. 13985), we are committed to advancing equity in health and healthcare for all individuals and addressing inequities that exist in our policies and programs that serve as barriers to equal opportunity. The term “equity” is defined in E.O. 13985 as “the consistent and systematic fair, just, and impartial treatment of all individuals, including individuals who belong to underserved communities that have been denied such treatment . . . .”

Benchmarks based on historically observed spending may be inequitable to the extent that historical patterns reflect existing inequities in both access to care and the provision of care. We are interested in considering how direct modification of benchmarks to account for existing inequities in care can be used to advance health equity. Direct increases to benchmarks for historically underserved populations would grant additional financial resources to health care providers accountable for the care of these populations, and may work to offset historical patterns of underspending that influence benchmark calculation. Furthermore, setting payment in excess of current spending for groups experiencing disadvantage would incentivize ACOs to attract those groups with care and enhancements valued by these beneficiaries. Pairing such benchmark changes with monitoring of use of resources, quality, and outcomes can ensure that increased benchmarks are being used to address care inequities, rather than solely generating increased shared savings potential for ACOs benefitting from positive benchmark adjustments.

In the proposed rule, we explained that the redesigned ACO REACH Model 380 will be implementing a benchmark adjustment to address historical health inequities within CMS ACO initiatives, with the intent of incentivizing ACOs to seek out and form relationships with historically underserved beneficiaries. The ACO REACH benchmark adjustment is calculated at the beneficiary level, and provides for a $30 per beneficiary per month (PBPM) increase to an ACO's benchmark for each assigned beneficiary classified as being in the top decile of underserved beneficiaries across all beneficiaries in the ACO REACH Model. The adjustment is designed in a budget neutral manner, in which benchmarks will be reduced by a smaller $6 PBPM adjustment for each assigned beneficiary classified as being in the bottom five deciles. Beneficiaries will be stratified using a composite measure that incorporates a combination of ADI (percentile score from 1-100) and Dual Medicaid Status (Medicare only vs. Full or Partial Dual Eligibility). The area-level measure (Area Deprivation Index 381 ) captures local socioeconomic factors correlated with medical disparities and underservice, while the beneficiary level measure (Dual Medicaid Status) captures economic challenges directly affecting individual beneficiaries' ability to access high-quality care. Because ADI is measured as a percentile (continuous variable), while Medicaid Status is a binary metric, a simple blending of the variables would underweight the ADI. Therefore, CMS will calculate the measure by starting with the ADI for a given beneficiary's census block group of residence (scored from 0-99 based on percentile relative to the nation), and applying a 25-point increase to the score for dually eligible beneficiaries. For example, a dually eligible beneficiary residing in a census block group with an ADI in the 75th percentile would receive a score of 75 + 25, for a total of 100.

380 See the ACO REACH Request for Applications at https://innovation.cms.gov/media/document/aco-reach-rfa .

381 The University of Wisconsin Neighborhood Atlas website ( https://www.neighborhoodatlas.medicine.wisc.edu/ ) Area Deprivation Index was developed by researchers at the University of Wisconsin based on a measure developed by the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) over 3 decades ago. It has been adapted to the Census Block Group level and includes factors measuring income, education, employment, and housing quality, which have been linked to a number of healthcare outcomes, to rank neighborhoods by socioeconomic disadvantage.

Each ACO will then receive a net benchmark adjustment based on the number of its assigned beneficiaries in each category. For example, an ACO with 100 beneficiaries scoring in the top decile and 500 beneficiaries in the bottom five deciles in a given month would receive a net neutral benchmark impact for that month [($30 PBPM × 100)−($6 PBPM × 500) = 0].

The ACO REACH health equity benchmark adjustment addresses inequity in benchmarks calculated primarily using historical expenditures, where historical underspending for underserved beneficiaries informs benchmarks. We noted, however, that in the context of the administratively-established benchmarking approach outlined in the comment solicitation in section III.G.7.a.-d. of the proposed rule, our intent would be to converge spending to the point where benchmarks can be calculated on a regionally consistent basis, which would address equity concerns associated with entrenched historical underspending. By utilizing risk-standardized regional rates to derive benchmarks, rather than blends of historical and regional spending that can entrench inappropriately low levels of spending for populations with unmet needs, the new benchmarking approach would facilitate setting benchmarks above current levels of spending for ACOs caring for underserved populations. Such adjustments could be implemented within the estimation of the predictive model of spending used for risk adjustment (the CMS-HCC model) or in a post-estimation benchmark adjustment as in ACO REACH so that benchmarks would support optimal rather than current spending for historically marginalized groups. These adjustments would not only act to correct resource disparities but also establish incentives for ACOs to attract underserved groups with enhanced care.

We also explained that these and other approaches could be employed to preserve (if not expand) existing payment differentials that set payment higher for certain providers and suppliers. Equity-motivated benchmark adjustments could be implemented, for example, to support additional funding for safety net providers (for example, CAHs, RHCs, and FQHCs). In other cases, add-on payments, such as DSH and IME, might continue to be carved out of ACO benchmarks and performance year expenditures, as they are now. We sought comment on other policy adjustments that should be considered for benchmark setting in the post-convergence phase.

We sought comment on—

• Approaches, generally, to addressing health inequities via the benchmark methodology for the Shared Savings Program, and specifically to incentivize ACOs to serve historically underserved communities.

• Considerations for what data would need to be collected on Medicare beneficiaries and their communities (for example, need for and access to health care providers, transportation, and social services) and what factors should be considered to identify underserved communities and adjust ACO benchmarks.

• Considerations for including a health equity benchmark adjustment in the Shared Savings Program in the near term comparable to the equity adjustment being tested within the ACO REACH Model.

• Considerations for addressing health inequities in the context of the benchmarking concept outlined in the comment solicitation in section III.G.7.a.-d. of the proposed rule.

• Considerations for monitoring and program integrity tools that would track the use of any health equity benchmark adjustments for the intended purposes.

• Considerations for whether benchmark adjustments for ACOs that include CAHs, RHCs, FQHCs, and REHs as ACO participants would improve care for rural and underserved populations and increase participation by these providers and suppliers in the Medicare Shared Savings Program.

The following is a summary of the public comments received in response to the Comment Solicitation on Addressing Health Equity Through Benchmarking and our responses:

Comment: The vast majority of commenters expressed support for exploring methodologies to address health equity via benchmarking changes. Specifically, many of these commenters noted that benchmark adjustments could be an effective tool to redirect resources to ACOs serving underserved communities.

Multiple commenters commented specifically on the health equity benchmark adjustment approach utilized in ACO REACH. Several of these commenters expressed support for using a similar methodology in implementing a health equity benchmark adjustment in the Shared Savings Program. However, other commenters expressed concern regarding the “budget-neutral” approach adopted in ACO REACH, whereby higher benchmarks for underserved populations were offset by lower benchmarks for other populations. These commenters noted that benchmark adjustments for underserved populations should not negatively impact benchmarks for ACOs serving other populations.

Several commenters specifically encouraged CMS to consider equity-motivated benchmark adjustments that would provide higher benchmarks to ACOs that include safety net providers, such as CAHs, FQHCs, RHCs, and REHs. One commenter suggested that benchmarks should include explicit adjustments for ACOs serving rural areas. Another commenter urged CMS to explore regulatory opportunities that would expand its authority to pay providers and suppliers differently depending on the degree of social deprivation in their community and explore obtaining authority from Congress to create additional payment streams to put these communities on a level funding basis with other communities.

One commenter expressed concerns with the potential use of the Area Deprivation Index (ADI) to identify underserved populations, and specifically noted that ADI does not incorporate race or ethnicity variables. This commenter recommended CMS consider using the Social Vulnerability Index because that index includes race as a variable which may account for the impact of structural racism on health care utilization and outcomes. Another commenter recommended that CMS encourage standardization of the collection of social determinants of health data, which could allow for more effective equity-motivated benchmark adjustments.

One commenter observed that CMS has recently rolled out many health equity related initiatives, and recommended observing the impacts of these policies, including the health equity benchmark adjustment being tested in the ACO REACH Model, prior to proposing new health equity initiatives. Another commenter suggested that any health equity motivated changes to the Shared Savings Program be considered holistically across multiple program features such as quality metrics and risk adjustment rather than focused on benchmarking alone.

Response: We appreciate these thoughtful comments in response to our comment solicitation on addressing health equity via benchmarking in the Shared Savings Program. We will consider these comments in the development of policies for future rulemaking.

3. ICRs Regarding the Medicare Shared Savings Program

Section 1899(e) of the Act provides that chapter 35 of title 44 U.S.C., which includes such provisions as the PRA, shall not apply to the Shared Savings Program. Accordingly, we are not setting out burden under the authority of the PRA. Please refer to section VII.E.7. of this final rule for a discussion of the impacts associated with the changes to the Shared Savings Program as described in section III.G. of this final rule.

h. Medicare Shared Savings Program

As we seek to advance the overall value-based care strategy of growth, alignment, and equity, we are finalizing modifications to the Medicare Shared Savings Program to increase program participation by supporting organizations new to value-based care and shared savings, especially for organizations serving underserved populations, and providing greater flexibility in the progression to performance-based risk, allowing these organizations more time to redesign their care processes to be successful under risk arrangements. As part of this effort, we are establishing advance investment payments for new, low revenue ACOs that are inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. To address the social needs of people with Medicare, these payments will increase with the number of beneficiaries who are enrolled in the Medicare Part D low-income subsidy (LIS), dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, and/or who live in areas with high deprivation (measured by the area deprivation index (ADI)) assigned to the ACO. We are also building on the existing Shared Savings Program benchmarking methodology by finalizing modifications to strengthen financial incentives for long term participation by reducing the impact of ACOs' performance on their benchmarks, to address the impact of ACO market penetration on regional expenditures used to adjust and update benchmarks, and to strengthen the business case for participation for ACOs serving high-risk and high dually eligible populations, which will help sustain participation and grow the program. Additionally, we are finalizing modifications to the benchmarking methodology to mitigate bias in regional expenditure calculations that benefits ACOs electing prospective assignment. We are also finalizing changes to the quality reporting and the quality performance requirements to support the transition of ACOs to all payer quality measure reporting. These provisions include implementing a health equity adjustment to an ACO's MIPS quality performance category score to recognize high performing ACOs serving a high proportion of underserved beneficiaries. Finally, we are making changes that are important for improved operations of the Shared Savings Program, including policies to reduce ACO administrative burden while maintaining program integrity.

7. Medicare Shared Savings Program

5. Alternatives Considered Related to the Medicare Shared Savings Program

One purpose of the prior savings adjustment we are adopting in this final rule is to mitigate the rebasing ratchet effect on an ACO's benchmark in order to improve the incentive for higher spending ACOs to reduce spending in advance of eventual rebasing and to encourage their renewal for successive agreement periods. It remains a possibility, however, that even with this provision, higher spending ACOs that are effective in reducing spending may eventually drop out of the Shared Savings Program absent the opportunity to participate in a one-sided model in the succeeding agreement period. While we project only 1 to 5 percent of new ACOs dropping out before the end of their first agreement period, the dropout rate could reach as high as 30 percent during the second agreement period. Signaling that risk will eventually be mandatory could prevent the formation of new low-revenue ACOs for whom a sharing-only incentive has proven to be effective. We considered an alternative in which low revenue ACOs would be permitted to participate in a one-sided model for a second full agreement period and estimate it would further increase program savings by at least $1 billion because it would increase retention for the type of ACO that has favorably responded to a moderate upside-only incentive in the past. This additional savings would result from (1) about a 60 percent reduction in the projected dropout rate by the end of the second agreement period for new and re-entering ACOs and (2) an assumed incremental increase in the share of ACOs that would form as low revenue (a type that is assumed to be more effective at reducing spending). This alternative estimate is likely conservative, as the savings impact could be significantly greater if such signaling regarding the second agreement period were to prove to be a key factor motivating a significant increase in the overall number of ACOs that enter a first agreement period under the Shared Savings Program (instead of just the proportion that form as low revenue versus high revenue).

We also considered adding guardrails for calculating shared savings by limiting the difference the ACPT may be allowed to show (in either direction) from actual national assignable trend. As we discussed in the proposed rule, setting a prospective symmetric threshold for correcting extreme projection error would automatically correct for bias in either direction and prevent the need for CMS to address pressure to correct projection error on an ad hoc basis. Public pressure to correct for projection error would be strongest in situations where actual growth eclipses the ACPT by a significant margin. If CMS were assumed to only update the ACPT in years where such pressures were magnified because a change will favor ACOs, this impact estimate would show $1.3 billion in additional spending over 10 years. This estimate presumes that CMS would limit deviation in ACPT from actual national trend to no more than 2 percent in years where the ACPT understates national trend. The cost of such policy to asymmetrically correct for unfavorable projection error would grow if the threshold for making such adjustments were assumed to move lower than 2 percent.

1. Shared Savings Program Provisions

As noted previously, a number of changes in this final rule collectively aim to increase participation in a more sustainable way for ACOs serving medically complex, high cost beneficiaries. The policies we are adopting in this final rule are designed to reverse recent trends where growth has plateaued in the Shared Savings Program, higher spending populations are increasingly underrepresented in the program since the change to regionally-adjusted benchmarks, and access to ACOs appears inequitable as evidenced by data indicating that Black (or African American), Hispanic, Asian/Pacific Islander, and American Indian/Alaska Native beneficiaries are less likely to be assigned to a Shared Savings Program ACO than their Non-Hispanic White counterparts, and to encourage growth of ACOs in underserved communities.

Additionally, ACOs have been found to perform better on certain patient-experience and performance measures than physician groups participating in the MIPS. Increased participation in the Shared Savings Program will extend ACO care coordination and quality improvement to segments of the beneficiary population that potentially have more to benefit from care management, and will stave off the risk apparent in the previous trajectory of the Shared Savings Program where ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers may have felt pressure to avoid engaging with beneficiaries in high needs communities in order to avoid assignment of high cost beneficiaries to their ACO and to improve their performance relative to a regional expenditures. In combination with the new participation options that are expected attract a mix of new participants, targeted provisions such as using an offset factor to reduce the negative regional adjustment for ACOs serving high risk and high dual populations, aim to increase the reach of ACO care coordination to more beneficiaries with high needs.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

50. The authority citation for part 425 continues to read as follows:

Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1302, 1306, 1395hh, and 1395jjj.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

51. Amend § 425.20 by—

a. In paragraph (2) of the definition of “Experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” by removing the phrase “prior to the agreement start date”;

b. In paragraph (2) of the definition of “Inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” by removing the phrase “prior to the agreement start date”;

c. In the definition of “Performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative”:

i. Revising paragraph (1)(i);

ii. Redesignating paragraphs (1)(ii) and (1)(iii) as paragraphs (1)(iii) and (1)(iv); and

iii. Adding a new paragraph (1)(ii).

The revision and addition read as follows:

§ 425.20 Definitions.

Performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative

(1) * * *

(i) For performance years beginning prior to January 1, 2023, BASIC track (Levels A through E).

(ii) For performance years beginning January 1, 2023 and in subsequent years, BASIC track (Levels C through E).

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

52. Amend § 425.100 by—

a. Revising paragraph (b)(1); and

b. Adding paragraph (d).

The revision and addition read as follows:

§ 425.100 General.

(b) * * *

(1) The ACO meets or exceeds the applicable minimum savings rate established under §§ 425.604, 425.605 (except as provided under § 425.605(h)), 425.606, 425.609, or 425.610.

(d) An ACO is eligible to receive advance investment payments if it meets the criteria under § 425.630(b).

§ 425.204 [Amended]

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

53. Amend § 425.204(g) introductory text by removing the references “§ 425.601, § 425.602, or § 425.603” and adding in its place the references “§§ 425.601, 425.602, 425.603, or 425.652”.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

54. Amend § 425.224(a)(4) by removing the phrase “, or a one-sided model of the BASIC track's glide path (Level A or Level B),”.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

55. Amend § 425.302 by adding paragraph (a)(3)(iv) to read as follows:

§ 425.302 Program requirements for data submission and certifications.

(a) * * *

(3) * * *

(iv) That the ACO has moved all advance investment payments received during that performance year into a designated advance investment payments account established under § 425.630(e) and the advance investment payments have been dispersed only for allowable uses.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

56. Amend § 425.308 by adding paragraph (b)(8) to read as follows:

§ 425.308 Public reporting and transparency.

(b) * * *

(8) Information, updated annually about the ACO's use of advance investment payments under § 425.630, for each performance year, including the following:

(i) The ACO's spend plan.

(ii) The total amount of any advance investment payments received from CMS.

(iii) An itemization of how advance investment payments were spent during the year, including expenditure categories, the dollar amounts spent on the various categories, any changes to the spend plan submitted under § 425.630(d), and such other information as may be specified by CMS.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

57. Section 425.310 is revised to read as follows:

§ 425.310 Marketing requirements.

(a) Requirements. Marketing materials and activities must:

(1) Use template language developed by CMS, if available.

(2) Not be used in a discriminatory manner or for discriminatory purposes.

(3) Comply with § 425.304 regarding beneficiary incentives.

(4) Not be materially inaccurate or misleading.

(b) Monitoring. (1) CMS may request the submission of marketing materials and activities at any time. If CMS determines that the marketing materials and activities do not comply with the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section, CMS will issue written notice of disapproval to the ACO.

(2) The ACO shall discontinue, and require its ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and other individuals or entities performing functions or services related to ACO activities to discontinue, use of any marketing materials or activities disapproved by CMS.

(c) Sanctions. Failure to comply with this section will subject the ACO to the penalties set forth in § 425.216, termination under § 425.218, or both.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

58. Amend § 425.312 by revising paragraph (a)(2) to read as follows:

§ 425.312 Beneficiary notifications.

(a) * * *

(2) Notification of the information specified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section must be carried out through the following methods:

(i) By an ACO participant posting signs in all of its facilities.

(ii) By an ACO participant making standardized written notices available upon request in all settings in which beneficiaries receive primary care services.

(iii) In the case of an ACO that has selected preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, by the ACO or ACO participant providing each fee-for-service beneficiary with a standardized written notice at least once during an agreement period in the form and manner specified by CMS. The standardized written notice must be furnished to all fee-for-service beneficiaries prior to or at the first primary care service visit during the first performance year in which the beneficiary receives a primary care service from an ACO participant.

(iv) In the case of an ACO that has selected prospective assignment, by the ACO or ACO participant providing each prospectively assigned beneficiary with a standardized written notice at least once during an agreement period in the form and manner specified by CMS. The standardized written notice must be furnished during the performance year for which the beneficiary is prospectively assigned to the ACO.

(v) Following the provision of the standardized written notice to a beneficiary, as specified in paragraphs (a)(2)(iii) and (iv) of this section, the ACO or ACO participant must provide a verbal or written follow-up communication to the beneficiary.

(A) The follow-up communication must occur no later than the earlier of the beneficiary's next primary care service visit or 180 days from the date the standardized written notice was provided.

(B) The ACO must retain a record of all beneficiaries receiving the follow-up communication, and the form and manner in which the communication was made available to the beneficiary. The ACO must make these records available to CMS upon request.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

59. Amend § 425.316 by adding paragraph (e) to read as follows:

§ 425.316 Monitoring of ACOs.

(e) Monitoring ACO eligibility for advance investment payments. (1) CMS monitors an ACO that receives advance investment payments pursuant to § 425.630 for changes in its ACO participants that may cause the ACO to no longer meet the standards specified in § 425.630(b)(3) and (4).

(2) If CMS determines during any performance year of the agreement period that an ACO receiving advance investment payments is experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or is a high revenue ACO, CMS—

(i) Will cease payment of advance investment payments, starting the quarter after the ACO became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or became a high revenue ACO.

(ii) May take compliance action as specified in §§ 425.216 and 425.218.

(3) If an ACO remains an ACO experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or a high revenue ACO after a deadline specified by CMS pursuant to compliance action under this section, the ACO must repay all advance investment payments it received. CMS will provide written notification to the ACO of the amount due and the ACO must pay such amount no later than 90 days after the receipt of such notification.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

60. Amend § 425.400 by—

a. Revising paragraph (c)(1)(vi) introductory text; and

b. Adding paragraph (c)(1)(vii).

The addition and revision read as follows:

§ 425.400 General.

(c) * * *

(1) * * *

(vi) For the performance year starting on January 1, 2022 as follows:

(vii) For the performance year starting on January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years as follows:

(A) CPT codes:

( 1 ) 96160 and 96161 (codes for administration of health risk assessment).

( 2 ) 99201 through 99215 (codes for office or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of a patient).

( 3 ) 99304 through 99318 (codes for professional services furnished in a nursing facility; professional services or services reported on an FQHC or RHC claim identified by these codes are excluded when furnished in a SNF).

( 4 ) 99319 through 99340 (codes for patient domiciliary, rest home, or custodial care visit).

( 5 ) 99341 through 99350 (codes for evaluation and management services furnished in a patient's home).

( 6 ) 99354 and 99355 (add-on codes, for prolonged evaluation and management or psychotherapy services beyond the typical service time of the primary procedure; when the base code is also a primary care service code under this paragraph (c)(1)(vii)).

( 7 ) 99421, 99422, and 99423 (codes for online digital evaluation and management).

( 8 ) 99424, 99425, 99426, and 99427 (codes for principal care management services).

( 9 ) 99437, 99487, 99489, 99490 and 99491 (codes for chronic care management).

( 10 ) 99439 (code for non-complex chronic care management).

( 11 ) 99483 (code for assessment of and care planning for patients with cognitive impairment).

( 12 ) 99484, 99492, 99493 and 99494 (codes for behavioral health integration services).

( 13 ) 99495 and 99496 (codes for transitional care management services).

( 14 ) 99497 and 99498 (codes for advance care planning; services identified by these codes furnished in an inpatient setting are excluded).

(B) HCPCS codes:

( 1 ) G0402 (code for the Welcome to Medicare visit).

( 2 ) G0438 and G0439 (codes for the annual wellness visits).

( 3 ) G0442 (code for alcohol misuse screening service).

( 4 ) G0443 (code for alcohol misuse counseling service).

( 5 ) G0444 (code for annual depression screening service).

( 6 ) G0463 (code for services furnished in ETA hospitals).

( 7 ) G0506 (code for chronic care management).

( 8 ) G2010 (code for the remote evaluation of patient video/images).

( 9 ) G2012 and G2252 (codes for virtual check-in).

( 10 ) G2058 (code for non-complex chronic care management).

( 11 ) G2064 and G2065 (codes for principal care management services).

( 12 ) G0317, G0318, and G2212 (codes for prolonged office or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of a patient).

( 13 ) G2214 (code for psychiatric collaborative care model).

( 14 ) G3002 and G3003 (codes for chronic pain management).

(C) Primary care service codes include any CPT code identified by CMS that directly replaces a CPT code specified in paragraph (c)(1)(vii)(A) of this section or a HCPCS code specified in paragraph (c)(1)(vii)(B) of this section, when the assignment window (as defined in § 425.20) for a benchmark or performance year includes any day on or after the effective date of the replacement code for payment purposes under FFS Medicare.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

61. Amend § 425.402 by adding paragraph (f) to read as follows:

§ 425.402 Basic assignment methodology.

(f) For performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years, CMS employs the following process to identify services furnished by FQHCs, RHCs, Method II CAHs, and ETA hospitals for purposes of the beneficiary assignment methodology under this section.

(1) Prior to the start of the performance year and periodically during the performance year, CMS will determine the CCNs for all FQHCs, RHCs, Method II CAHs, and ETA hospitals enrolled under the TIN of an ACO participant, including all CCNs with an active enrollment in Medicare and all CCNs with a deactivated enrollment status.

(2) CMS uses the CCNs identified in paragraph (f)(1) of this section in determining assignment for the performance year.

(3) CMS accounts for changes in CCN enrollment status during the performance year as follows:

(i) If a CCN with no prior Medicare claims experience enrolls under the TIN of an ACO participant after the ACO certifies its ACO participant list for a performance year as required under § 425.118(a)(3), CMS will consider services furnished by that CCN in determining beneficiary assignment to the ACO for the applicable performance year for ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation.

(ii) Services furnished by a CCN with a deactivated enrollment status that is enrolled under an ACO participant at the start of a performance year will be considered in determining beneficiary assignment to the ACO for the applicable performance year or benchmark year.

(iii) If a CCN enrolled under the TIN of an ACO participant at the start of the performance year enrolls under a different TIN during a performance year, CMS will continue to treat services billed by the CCN as services furnished by the ACO participant it was enrolled under at the start of the performance year for purposes of determining beneficiary assignment to the ACO for the applicable performance year.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

62. Amend § 425.512—

a. In paragraph (a)(4)(i)(A), by removing the phrase “quality performance score” and adding in its place the phrase “health equity adjusted quality performance score”;

b. By revising paragraph (a)(4)(ii) and adding paragraph (a)(4)(iii);

c. By revising paragraphs (a)(5)(i) and (ii) and adding paragraph (a)(5)(iii)

d. By adding paragraph (a)(6);

e. By redesignating paragraph (b) as paragraph (c);

f. By adding new paragraph (b);

g. In newly redesignated paragraph (c)(2) introductory text, by removing the reference “paragraph (b)(1) of this section” and adding in its place the reference “paragraph (c)(1) of this section”; and

h. By revising newly redesignated paragraph (c)(3).

The revisions and additions read as follows:

§ 425.512 Determining the ACO quality performance standard for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2021.

(a) * * *

(4) * * *

(ii) For performance year 2023, CMS designates an alternative quality performance standard for an ACO that does not meet the criteria described in paragraphs (a)(2) or (a)(4)(i) of this section, but reports quality data via the APP established under § 414.1367 of this subchapter according to the method of submission established by CMS and achieves a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set.

(iii) If an ACO does not report any of the ten CMS Web Interface measures or any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP, the ACO will not meet the quality performance standard or the alternative quality performance standard.

(5) * * *

(i) Except as specified in paragraph (a)(2) of this section, CMS designates the quality performance standard as the ACO reporting quality data via the APP established under § 414.1367 of this subchapter, according to the method of submission established by CMS and the following:

(A) For performance year 2024—

( 1 ) Achieving a health equity adjusted quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, or

( 2 ) If the ACO reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter and the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 of this subchapter for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, achieving a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining five measures in the APP measure set.

(B) For performance year 2025 and subsequent years—Achieving a health equity adjusted quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring.

(ii) CMS designates an alternative quality performance standard for an ACO that does not meet the criteria described in paragraphs (a)(2) or (a)(5)(i) of this section, but reports quality data via the APP established under § 414.1367 of this subchapter according to the method of submission established by CMS and achieves a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set.

(iii) An ACO will not meet the quality performance standard or the alternative quality performance standard if:

(A) For performance year 2024, the ACO does not report any of the ten CMS Web Interface measures or any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP.

(B) For performance year 2025 and subsequent years, the ACO does not report any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP.

(6) For performance years 2022, 2023, and 2024, CMS designates a performance benchmark and minimum attainment level for each CMS Web Interface measure and establishes a point scale for the measure as described in § 425.502(b).

(b) Calculation of ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score for performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years.

(1) For an ACO that reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and administers the CAHPS for MIPS survey, CMS calculates the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score as the sum of the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score for all measures in the APP measure set and the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points calculated in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of this section. The sum of these values may not exceed 100 percent.

(2) CMS calculates the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points as follows:

(i) For each measure in the APP measure set, CMS groups an ACO's performance into the top, middle, or bottom third of ACO measure performers by reporting mechanism.

(ii) CMS assigns values to the ACO for its performance on each measure as follows:

(A) Values of four, two, or zero for each measure for which the ACO's performance places it in the top, middle, or bottom third of ACO measure performers, respectively.

(B) Values of zero for each measure that CMS does not evaluate because the ACO does not meet the case minimum or the minimum sample size for the measure.

(iii) CMS sums the values assigned to the ACO according to paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section, to calculate the ACO's measure performance scaler.

(iv) CMS calculates an underserved multiplier for the ACO.

(A) CMS determines the proportion ranging from zero to one of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for the performance year that is considered underserved based on the highest of —

( 1 ) The proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an Area Deprivation Index national percentile rank of at least 85; or

( 2 ) The proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries that are enrolled in the Medicare Part D low-income subsidy (LIS); or are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

(B) If the proportion determined in accordance with paragraph (b)(2)(iv)(A) of this section is lower than 20 percent, the ACO is ineligible for health equity adjustment bonus points.

(v) Except as specified in paragraph (b)(2)(iv)(B) of this section, CMS calculates the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points as the product of the measure performance scaler determined under paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section and the underserved multiplier determined under paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of this section. If the product of these values is greater than 10, the value of the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points is set equal to 10.

(3) The ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score, determined in accordance with paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section, is used as follows:

(i) In determining whether the ACO meets the quality performance standard as specified under paragraphs (a)(4)(i)(A), (a)(5)(i)(A)( 1 ), and (a)(5)(i)(B) of this section.

(ii) In determining the final sharing rate for calculating shared savings payments under the BASIC track in accordance with § 425.605(d), and under the ENHANCED track in accordance with § 425.610(d), for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in paragraphs (a)(4)(ii) or (a)(5)(ii) of this section.

(iii) In determining the shared loss rate for calculating shared losses under the ENHANCED track in accordance with § 425.610(f), for an ACO that meets the quality performance standard established in paragraphs (a)(2), (a)(4)(i) and (a)(5)(i) of this section or the alternative quality performance standard established in paragraphs (a)(4)(ii) or (a)(5)(ii) of this section.

(iv) In determining the quality performance score for an ACO affected by extreme and uncontrollable circumstances as described in paragraphs (c)(3)(ii) and (iii) of this section.

(c) * * *

(3) If the ACO reports quality data via the APP and meets data completeness and case minimum requirements:

(i) For performance years 2021 and 2022, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's quality performance score or the equivalent of the 30th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year.

(ii) For performance year 2023, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 30th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year.

(iii) For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

63. Amend § 425.600—

a. By revising the heading of paragraph (a)(4)(i)(B);

b. In paragraph (a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( ii ), revise the last sentence.

c. In paragraph (a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( iv ), by removing the phrase “For performance year 2023, the ACO is automatically advanced to the level of the BASIC track's glide path to which the ACO would have automatically advanced absent the election to maintain its participation level for performance year 2022” and adding in its place the phrase “Except as provided in paragraph (a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( vi ) of this section, for performance year 2023, the ACO is automatically advanced to the level of the BASIC track's glide path to which the ACO would have automatically advanced absent the election to maintain its participation level for performance year 2022”;

d. By adding paragraphs (a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( vi ) and ( vii ), and (a)(4)(i)(C);

e. In paragraph (a)(4)(ii), by removing the reference “paragraph (d) of this section” and adding in its place the references “paragraph (d) or paragraph (g)(2) of this section, as applicable”;

f. In paragraph (d) introductory text, by removing the phrase “beginning on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years” and adding in its place the phrase “beginning on or after July 1, 2019, and before January 1, 2024”;

g. By revising paragraph (e) introductory text;

h. In paragraph (f)(4)(ii), by removing the reference “§ 425.601(f)” and adding in its place the references “§§ 425.601(f), and 425.656(d)”;

i. In paragraph (f)(4)(iii), by removing the reference “§ 425.601(e)” and adding in its place the references “§§ 425.601(e), and 425.652(c)(2)”; and

j. By adding paragraphs (g) and (h).

The revisions and additions read as follows:

§ 425.600 Selection of risk model.

(a) * * *

(4) * * *

(i) * * *

(B) Glide path progression for agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019 and before January 1, 2024. * * *

( 2 ) * * *

( ii ) * * * In the case of an ACO that elects to remain in Level B for an additional performance year pursuant to the second sentence of paragraph (a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( ii ) of this section, and except as provided in paragraph (a)(4)(i)(B)(2)( vi) of this section, the ACO is automatically advanced to Level E under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(A)( 5 ) of this section at the start of performance year 4 (or performance year 5 in the case of ACOs entering an agreement period beginning on July 1, 2019).

( vi ) For performance year 2023, an ACO in Level A under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(A)( 1 ) of this section or in Level B under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(A)( 2 ) of this section may elect to remain in the same level of the BASIC track's glide path in which it participated during performance year 2022, for the remainder of the agreement period, unless the ACO elects to transition to a higher level of risk and potential reward within the BASIC track's glide path as provided in § 425.226(a)(2)(i). If the ACO does not elect to remain under Level A or Level B, for performance year 2023, the ACO is automatically advanced to the next level of the BASIC track's glide path to which the ACO would have automatically advanced absent any election to maintain its participation level for performance year 2022 under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( iv ) of this section and, if applicable, the election to maintain its participation level for performance year 2021 under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( iii ) of this section, unless the ACO elects to transition to a higher level of risk and potential reward within the BASIC track's glide path as provided in § 425.226(a)(2)(i). A voluntary election by an ACO under this paragraph must be made in the form and manner and by a deadline established by CMS.

( vii ) For performance year 2024, an ACO with an agreement period beginning January 1, 2023 in Level A under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(A)( 1 ) of this section or in Level B under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(A)( 2 ) of this section may elect to remain in the same level of the BASIC track's glide path in which it participated during performance year 2023, for the remainder of the agreement period, unless the ACO elects to transition to a higher level of risk and potential reward within the BASIC track's glide path as provided in § 425.226(a)(2)(i). If the ACO does not elect to remain under Level A or Level B, for performance year 2024, the ACO is automatically advanced to the next level of the BASIC track's glide path, unless the ACO elects to transition to a higher level of risk and potential reward within the BASIC track's glide path as provided in § 425.226(a)(2)(i). A voluntary election by an ACO under this paragraph must be made in the form and manner and by a deadline established by CMS.

(C) Glide path progression for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024. ( 1 ) Level of glide path entry. An ACO eligible to enter the BASIC track's glide path as determined under paragraph (g)(1) of this section may elect to enter its agreement period at any of the levels of risk and potential reward available under paragraphs (a)(4)(i)(A)( 1 ) through ( 5 ) of this section.

( 2 ) Automatic advancement. An ACO is automatically advanced to the next level of the BASIC track's glide path at the start of each subsequent performance year of the agreement period, if a higher level of risk and potential reward is available under the BASIC track, except as follows:

( i ) The ACO elects to transition to a higher level of risk and potential reward within the BASIC track's glide path as provided in § 425.226(a)(2)(i).

( ii ) The ACO elects to maintain its level of participation as provided in paragraph (a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 ) of this section.

( iii ) The ACO is automatically advanced to Level E pursuant to paragraph (h)(2)(i) of this section.

( 3 ) Election to remain under a one-sided model. An eligible ACO that enters the BASIC track's glide path at Level A under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(A)( 1 ) of this section and is currently at Level A may elect to remain in Level A under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(A)( 1 ) of this section for all subsequent performance years of the agreement period.

( i ) To be eligible to participate under Level A of the BASIC track as described in this paragraph, the ACO must meet the following requirements: the ACO is participating in its first agreement period under the BASIC track under paragraph (a)(4) of this section, and is not participating in an agreement period under the BASIC track as a renewing ACO (as defined at § 425.20) or a re-entering ACO (as defined in § 425.20) that previously participated in the BASIC track's glide path under paragraph (a)(4) of this section; and the ACO is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives (as defined in § 425.20).

( ii ) A voluntary election by an ACO under this paragraph (a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 ) must be made in the form and manner and by a deadline established by CMS.

( iii ) The ACO's election to remain in Level A applies for the entirety of the agreement period, unless the ACO elects to transition to a higher level of risk and potential reward within the BASIC track's glide path as provided in § 425.226(a)(2)(i).

( 4 ) Prior to entering performance-based risk, an ACO must meet all requirements to participate under performance-based risk, including establishing an adequate repayment mechanism as specified under § 425.204(f) and selecting a MSR/MLR from the options specified under § 425.605(b).

( 5 ) If the ACO fails to meet the requirements to participate under performance-based risk under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(C)( 4 ) of this section, the agreement is terminated.

( 6 ) If, in accordance with § 425.226(a)(2)(i), the ACO elects to transition to a higher level of risk and reward available under paragraphs (a)(4)(i)(A)( 3 ) through ( 5 ) of this section, then the automatic transition to levels of higher risk and reward specified in paragraph (a)(4)(i)(C)( 2 ) of this section applies to all subsequent performance years of the agreement period.

(e) For performance years beginning on or after July 1, 2019 and before January 1, 2024, CMS monitors low revenue ACOs identified as experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, during an agreement period in the BASIC track, for changes in the revenue of ACO participants that would cause the ACO to be considered a high revenue ACO and ineligible for participation in the BASIC track. If the ACO meets the definition of a high revenue ACO (as specified in § 425.20)—

(g) For agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024, CMS determines an ACO's eligibility for the Shared Savings Program participation options specified in paragraph (a) of this section as follows:

(1) If an ACO is determined to be inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, the ACO may enter either the BASIC track's glide path at any of the levels of risk and potential reward under paragraphs (a)(4)(i)(A)( 1 ) through ( 5 ) of this section, or the ENHANCED track under paragraph (a)(3) of this section.

(i) An ACO that is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives may participate under the BASIC track's glide path for a maximum of two agreement periods, as specified in paragraph (a)(4)(i)(C) of this section.

(ii) An ACO that enters an agreement under the BASIC track's glide path at either Level A under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(A)( 1 ) of this section or Level B under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(A)( 2 ) of this section is deemed to have completed one agreement under the BASIC track's glide path and is only eligible to enter a second agreement under the BASIC track's glide path if the ACO continues to meet the definition of inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and satisfies either of the following:

(A) The ACO is the same legal entity as a current or previous ACO that previously entered into a participation agreement for participation in the BASIC track's glide path only one time.

(B) For a new ACO identified as a re-entering ACO, the ACO in which the majority of the new ACO's participants were participating previously entered into a participation agreement for participation in the BASIC track's glide path only one time.

(iii) An ACO that is determined to be inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives but is not eligible to enter the BASIC track's glide path as specified in paragraph (a)(4)(i)(C) of this section may enter either the BASIC track Level E under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(A)( 5 ) of this section for all performance years of the agreement period, or the ENHANCED track under paragraph (a)(3) of this section.

(2) If an ACO is determined to be experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, the ACO may enter either the BASIC track Level E under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(A)( 5 ) of this section for all performance years of the agreement period, or the ENHANCED track under paragraph (a)(3) of this section.

(h)(1) For performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, CMS monitors ACOs identified as inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and participating in the BASIC track under a one-sided model during an agreement period pursuant to an election under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( vi ), paragraph (a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( vii ), or paragraph (a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 ) of this section for changes to their certified list of ACO participants that would cause the ACO to be considered experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and ineligible for participation in a one-sided model.

(2) If the ACO meets the definition of experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives (under § 425.20)—

(i) The ACO is permitted to complete the performance year for which it met the definition of experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives in a one-sided model of the BASIC track, but is ineligible to continue participation in the one-sided model after the end of that performance year if it continues to meet the definition of experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives. The ACO will be automatically advanced to Level E within the BASIC track under paragraph (a)(4)(i)(A)( 5 ) of this section at the start of the next performance year and will remain in Level E for all subsequent performance years of the agreement period; and

(ii) Prior to entering performance-based risk, the ACO must meet all requirements to participate under performance-based risk, including establishing an adequate repayment mechanism as specified under § 425.204(f) and selecting a MSR/MLR from the options specified under § 425.605(b), in accordance with paragraph (a)(4)(i)(B)( 2 )( v ) of this section or paragraph (a)(4)(i)(C)( 4 ) of this section, as applicable. If the ACO fails to meet the requirements to participate under performance-based risk, the agreement is terminated in accordance with paragraph (a)(4)(i)(B)( 3 ) of this section or paragraph (a)(4)(i)(C)( 5 ) of this section, as applicable.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

64. Amend § 425.601 by—

a. Revising the section heading, and paragraphs (a)(1)(i) and (c)(2)(i);

b. In paragraph (d) introductory text, by removing the dash at the end of the paragraph, and adding a colon in its place;

c. In paragraph by (d)(1)(iv), by removing the semicolon at the end of paragraph, and adding a period in its place;

d. In paragraph (d)(2), by removing “; and”, and adding a period in its place;

e. Removing paragraph (d)(3);

f. In paragraph (f)(5)(ii), by removing the reference “paragraph (f)(4)(i) of this section”, and adding in its place the reference “paragraph (f)(5)(i) of this section”; and

g. In paragraph (f)(5)(iv), by removing the references “paragraphs (f)(1) and (2) of this section”, and adding in their place the references “paragraphs (f)(1) through (3) of this section”.

The revisions read as follows:

§ 425.601 Establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark for agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, and before January 1, 2024.

(a) * * *

(1) * * *

(i) This calculation excludes indirect medical education (IME) and disproportionate share hospital (DSH) payments, and the supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and Puerto Rico hospitals.

(c) * * *

(2) * * *

(i) Excludes IME and DSH payments, and the supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and Puerto Rico hospitals; and

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

65. Amend § 425.605—

a. By revising paragraph (a) introductory text, paragraphs (a)(1)(i) and (ii), paragraph(a)(2) introductory text, and paragraphs (a)(5)(i) and (a)(6);

b. By adding paragraph (b)(2)(ii)(E);

c. By revising paragraphs (b)(3), and (c)(2);

d. In paragraph (d)(1) introductory text, by removing the reference “§ 425.600(d)” and adding in its place the references “§ 425.600(d) or § 425.600(g)”;

e. By revising the heading of (d)(1)(i)(A)( 2 );

f. By adding paragraphs (d)(1)(i)(A)( 3 ) and ( 4 );

g. By revising paragraph (d)(1)(i)(B)( 1 );

h. By revising the heading of paragraph (d)(1)(ii)(A)( 2 );

i. By adding paragraphs (d)(1)(ii)(A)( 3 ) and ( 4 );

j. By revising paragraph (d)(1)(ii)(B)( 1 );

k. By revising the heading of paragraph (d)(1)(iii)(A)( 2 );

l. By adding paragraphs (d)(1)(iii)(A)( 3 ) and ( 4 );

m. By revising paragraph (d)(1)(iii)(B)( 1 );

n. In paragraph (d)(1)(iii)(D)( 2 ), by removing the reference “§ 425.601” and adding in its place the references “§ 425.601 or § 425.652”;

o. By revising the heading of paragraph (d)(1)(iv)(A)( 2 );

p. By adding paragraphs (d)(1)(iv)(A)( 3 ) and ( 4 );

q. By revising paragraph (d)(1)(iv)(B)( 1 );

r. In paragraph (d)(1)(iv)(D)( 2 ), by removing the reference “§ 425.601” and adding in its place the references “§ 425.601 or § 425.652”;

s. By revising the heading of paragraph (d)(1)(v)(A)( 2 );

t. By adding paragraphs (d)(1)(v)(A)( 3 ) and ( 4 );

u. By revising paragraph (d)(1)(v)(B)( 1 );

v. In paragraph (d)(1)(v)(D)( 2 ), by removing the reference “§ 425.601” wherever it appears and adding in its place the references “§ 425.601 or § 425.652”;

w. In paragraph (d)(2), by removing the reference “§ 425.600(d)” and adding in its place the references “§ 425.600(d) or § 425.600(g)”; and

x. By adding paragraph (h).

The revisions and additions read as follows:

§ 425.605 Calculation of shared savings and losses under the BASIC track.

(a) General rules. For each performance year, CMS determines whether the estimated average per capita Medicare Parts A and B fee-for-service expenditures for Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries assigned to the ACO are above or below the updated benchmark determined under § 425.601 or § 425.652, as applicable. In order to qualify for a shared savings payment under the BASIC track, or to be responsible for sharing losses with CMS, an ACO's average per capita Medicare Parts A and B fee-for-service expenditures for its assigned beneficiary population for the performance year must be below or above the updated benchmark, respectively, by at least the minimum savings or loss rate under paragraph (b) of this section except as provided in paragraph (h) of this section.

(1) * * *

(i) For agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024:

(A) Positive adjustments in prospective HCC risk scores are subject to a cap of 3 percent.

(B) This cap is the maximum increase in risk scores for each agreement period, such that any positive adjustment between BY3 and any performance year in the agreement period cannot be larger than 3 percent.

(ii) For agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years:

(A) Positive adjustments in prospective HCC risk scores are subject to a cap equal to the ACO's aggregate growth in demographic risk scores between BY3 and the performance year (positive or negative) plus 3 percentage points.

(B) The cap described in paragraph (a)(1)(ii)(A) of this section will apply to prospective HCC risk score growth for a population described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section only if the ACO's aggregate growth in prospective HCC risk scores between BY3 and the performance year across all of the populations described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section exceeds this cap. If the cap described in paragraph (a)(1)(ii)(A) of this section is determined to apply, the value of the cap is the maximum increase in risk scores for the applicable performance year, such that any positive adjustment between BY3 and the performance year cannot be larger than the value of the cap for any of the populations described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section.

(C) The aggregate growth in demographic risk scores for purposes of paragraph (a)(1)(ii)(A) of this section and the aggregate growth in prospective HCC risk scores for purposes of paragraph (a)(1)(ii)(B) of this section is calculated by taking a weighted average of the growth in demographic risk scores or prospective HCC risk scores, as applicable, across the populations described in paragraph (a)(2) of this section. When calculating the weighted average growth in demographic risk scores or prospective HCC risk scores, as applicable, the weight applied to the growth in risk scores (expressed as a ratio of the ACO's performance year risk score to the ACO's BY3 risk score) for each Medicare enrollment type is equal to the product of the historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type and the performance year person years for that enrollment type.

(2) In risk adjusting the benchmark as described in §§ 425.601(a)(10) and 425.652(a)(10), CMS makes separate adjustments for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(5) * * *

(i) These calculations exclude indirect medical education (IME) and disproportionate share hospital (DSH) payments, and the supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and Puerto Rico hospitals.

(6) In order to qualify for a shared savings payment, the ACO's average per capita Medicare Parts A and B fee-for-service expenditures for the performance year must be below the applicable updated benchmark by at least the minimum savings rate established for the ACO under paragraph (b) of this section except as provided in paragraph (h) of this section.

(b) * * *

(2) * * *

(ii) * * *

(E) Automatic transition from Level A to Level E of the BASIC track's glide path under § 425.600(h)(2).

(3) Except as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, in order to qualify for a shared savings payment, an ACO's average per capita Medicare Parts A and B fee-for-service expenditures for its assigned beneficiary population for the performance year must be below its updated benchmark by at least the MSR established for the ACO.

(c) * * *

(2) For performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2021. To qualify for shared savings, an ACO must—

(i) Meet either the minimum savings rate requirement established under paragraph (b) of this section, or the criteria described in paragraph (h) of this section;

(ii) Meet either the quality performance standard or alternative quality performance standard established under § 425.512; and

(iii) Otherwise maintain its eligibility to participate in the Shared Savings Program under this part.

(d) * * *

(1) * * *

(i) * * *

(A) * * *

( 2 ) For performance years beginning on January 1, 2021, or January 1, 2022. * * *

( 3 ) For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2023. An ACO that meets all the requirements for receiving shared savings payments under the BASIC track, Level A, receives a shared savings payment equal to a percentage of all the savings under the updated benchmark (up to the performance payment limit described in paragraph (d)(1)(i)(B) of this section). The percentage is as follows:

( i ) 40 percent for an ACO that meets the quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(4)(i).

( ii ) 40 percent multiplied by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b) for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(4)(ii).

( 4 ) For performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024. An ACO that meets all the requirements for receiving shared savings payments under the BASIC track, Level A, receives a shared savings payment equal to a percentage of all the savings under the updated benchmark (up to the performance payment limit described in paragraph (d)(1)(i)(B) of this section). Except as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, the percentage is as follows:

( i ) 40 percent for an ACO that meets the quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(5)(i).

( ii ) 40 percent multiplied by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b) for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(5)(ii).

(B) * * *

( 1 ) If an ACO qualifies for savings by meeting or exceeding the MSR, or as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, the final sharing rate specified in paragraph (d)(1)(i)(A) of this section applies to an ACO's savings on a first dollar basis.

(ii) * * *

(A) * * *

( 2 ) For performance years beginning on January 1, 2021, or January 1, 2022. * * *

( 3 ) For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2023. An ACO that meets all the requirements for receiving shared savings payments under the BASIC track, Level B, receives a shared savings payment equal to a percentage of all the savings under the updated benchmark (up to the performance payment limit described in paragraph (d)(1)(ii)(B) of this section). The percentage is as follows:

( i ) 40 percent for an ACO that meets the quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(4)(i).

( ii ) 40 percent multiplied by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b) for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(4)(ii).

( 4 ) For performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024. An ACO that meets all the requirements for receiving shared savings payments under the BASIC track, Level B, receives a shared savings payment equal to a percentage of all the savings under the updated benchmark (up to the performance payment limit described in paragraph (d)(1)(ii)(B) of this section). Except as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, the percentage is as follows:

( i ) 40 percent for an ACO that meets the quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(5)(i).

( ii ) 40 percent multiplied by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b) for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(5)(ii).

(B) * * *

( 1 ) If an ACO qualifies for savings by meeting or exceeding the MSR, or as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, the final sharing rate specified in paragraph (d)(1)(ii)(A) of this section applies to an ACO's savings on a first dollar basis.

(iii) * *

(A) * * *

(2) For performance years beginning on January 1, 2021, or January 1, 2022. * * *

( 3 ) For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2023. An ACO that meets all the requirements for receiving shared savings payments under the BASIC track, Level C, receives a shared savings payment equal to a percentage of all the savings under the updated benchmark (up to the performance payment limit described in paragraph (d)(1)(iii)(B) of this section). The percentage is as follows:

( i ) 50 percent for an ACO that meets the quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(4)(i).

( ii ) 50 percent multiplied by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b) for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(4)(ii).

( 4 ) For performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024. An ACO that meets all the requirements for receiving shared savings payments under the BASIC track, Level C, receives a shared savings payment equal to a percentage of all the savings under the updated benchmark (up to the performance payment limit described in paragraph (d)(1)(iii)(B) of this section). Except as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, the percentage is as follows:

( i ) 50 percent for an ACO that meets the quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(5)(i).

( ii ) 50 percent multiplied by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b) for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(5)(ii).

(B) * * *

( 1 ) If an ACO qualifies for savings by meeting or exceeding the MSR, or as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, the final sharing rate specified in paragraph (d)(1)(iii)(A) of this section applies to an ACO's savings on a first dollar basis.

(iv) * * *

(A) * * *

( 2 ) For performance years beginning on January 1, 2021, or January 1, 2022. * * *

( 3 ) For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2023. An ACO that meets all the requirements for receiving shared savings payments under the BASIC track, Level D, receives a shared savings payment equal to a percentage of all the savings under the updated benchmark (up to the performance payment limit described in paragraph (d)(1)(iv)(B) of this section). The percentage is as follows:

( i ) 50 percent for an ACO that meets the quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(4)(i).

( ii ) 50 percent multiplied by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b) for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(4)(ii).

( 4 ) For performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024. An ACO that meets all the requirements for receiving shared savings payments under the BASIC track, Level D, receives a shared savings payment equal to a percentage of all the savings under the updated benchmark (up to the performance payment limit described in paragraph (d)(1)(iv)(B) of this section). Except as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, the percentage is as follows:

( i ) 50 percent for an ACO that meets the quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(5)(i).

( ii ) 50 percent multiplied by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b) for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(5)(ii).

(B) * * *

( 1 ) If an ACO qualifies for savings by meeting or exceeding the MSR, or as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, the final sharing rate specified in paragraph (d)(1)(iv)(A) of this section applies to an ACO's savings on a first dollar basis.

(v) * * *

(A) * * *

( 2 ) For performance years beginning on January 1, 2021, or January 1, 2022. * * *

( 3 ) For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2023. An ACO that meets all the requirements for receiving shared savings payments under the BASIC track, Level E, receives a shared savings payment equal to a percentage of all the savings under the updated benchmark (up to the performance payment limit described in paragraph (d)(1)(v)(B) of this section). The percentage is as follows:

( i ) 50 percent for an ACO that meets the quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(4)(i).

( ii ) 50 percent multiplied by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b) for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(4)(ii).

( 4 ) For performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024. An ACO that meets all the requirements for receiving shared savings payments under the BASIC track, Level E, receives a shared savings payment equal to a percentage of all the savings under the updated benchmark (up to the performance payment limit described in paragraph (d)(1)(v)(B) of this section). Except as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, the percentage is as follows:

( i ) 50 percent for an ACO that that meets the quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(5)(i).

( ii ) 50 percent multiplied by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b) for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(5)(ii).

(B) * * *

( 1 ) If an ACO qualifies for savings by meeting or exceeding the MSR, or as provided in paragraph (h) of this section, the final sharing rate specified in paragraph (d)(1)(v)(A) of this section applies to an ACO's savings on a first dollar basis.

(h) Calculation of shared savings for certain BASIC track ACOs not meeting MSR requirement. An ACO that does not meet the minimum savings rate requirement established under paragraph (b) of this section but meets the other criteria described in paragraphs (c)(2)(ii) and (iii) of this section may qualify for a shared savings payment as provided in this paragraph.

(1) To qualify for a shared savings payment under this paragraph, an ACO must meet all of the following criteria:

(i) The ACO has average per capita Medicare Parts A and B fee-for-service expenditures for the performance year below the updated benchmark determined under § 425.652.

(ii) The ACO is a low revenue ACO as defined in § 425.20 as determined at the time of financial reconciliation for the performance year.

(iii) The ACO has at least 5,000 assigned beneficiaries for the relevant performance year as determined at the time of financial reconciliation for the performance year.

(iv) The ACO is participating in an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, or in subsequent years.

(2) The ACO's shared savings payment will be calculated as described in paragraph (d) of this section according to the ACO's applicable level of the BASIC track with the exception that the final sharing rate applied will equal one-half of the applicable percentage described in paragraph (d)(1)(i)(A)( 4 ), (d)(1)(ii)(A)( 4 ), (d)(1)(iii)(A)( 4 ), (d)(1)(iv)(A)( 4 ), or (d)(1)(v)(A)( 4 ) of this section.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

66. Amend § 425.610—

a. In paragraph (a) introductory text, by removing the references “§ 425.601, § 425.602 or § 425.603” and adding in its place the references “§ 425.601, 425.602, 425.603, or 425.652”;

b. By revising paragraphs (a)(2)(i) and (ii), (a)(3) introductory text, (a)(6)(i) and (d)(2) paragraph heading;

c. By adding paragraphs (d)(3) and (4);

d. By revising the heading of paragraph (f)(2);

e. By adding paragraphs (f)(3) and (4); and

f. In paragraph (g), by removing the references “§ 425.601, § 425.602 or § 425.603” and adding in its place the references “§ 425.601, 425.602, 425.603 or 425.652”.

The revisions and additions read as follows:

§ 425.610 Calculation of shared savings and losses under the ENHANCED track.

(a) * * *

(2) * * *

(i) For agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024:

(A) Positive adjustments in prospective HCC risk scores are subject to a cap of 3 percent.

(B) This cap is the maximum increase in risk scores for each agreement period, such that any positive adjustment between BY3 and any performance year in the agreement period cannot be larger than 3 percent.

(ii) For agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years:

(A) Positive adjustments in prospective HCC risk scores are subject to a cap equal to the ACO's aggregate growth in demographic risk scores between BY3 and the performance year (positive or negative) plus 3 percentage points.

(B) The cap described in paragraph (a)(2)(ii)(A) of this section will apply to prospective HCC risk score growth for a population described in paragraph (a)(3) of this section only if the ACO's aggregate growth in prospective HCC risk scores between BY3 and the performance year across all of the populations described in paragraph (a)(3) of this section exceeds this cap. If the cap described in paragraph (a)(2)(ii)(A) of this section is determined to apply, the value of the cap is the maximum increase in risk scores for the applicable performance year, such that any positive adjustment between BY3 and the performance year cannot be larger than the value of the cap for any of the populations described in paragraph (a)(3) of this section.

(C) The aggregate growth in demographic risk scores for purposes of paragraph (a)(2)(ii)(A) of this section and the aggregate growth in prospective HCC risk scores for purposes of paragraph (a)(2)(ii)(B) of this section is calculated by taking a weighted average of the growth in demographic risk scores or prospective HCC risk scores, as applicable, across the populations described in paragraph (a)(3) of this section. When calculating the weighted average growth in demographic risk scores or prospective HCC risk scores, as applicable, the weight applied to the growth in risk scores (expressed as a ratio of the ACO's performance year risk score to the ACO's BY3 risk score) for each Medicare enrollment type is equal to the product of the historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type and the performance year person years for that enrollment type.

(3) In risk adjusting the benchmark as described in §§ 425.601(a)(10), 425.602(a)(9), 425.603(c)(10), and 425.652(a)(10) CMS makes separate adjustments for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(6) * * *

(i) These calculations will exclude indirect medical education (IME) and disproportionate share hospital (DSH) payments, and the supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and Puerto Rico hospitals.

(d) * * *

(2) For performance years beginning on January 1, 2021, or January 1, 2022. * * *

(3) For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2023. An ACO that meets all the requirements for receiving shared savings payments under the ENHANCED track will receive a shared savings payment equal to a percentage of all the savings under the updated benchmark (up to the performance payment limit described in paragraph (e)(2) of this section). The percentage is as follows:

(i) 75 percent for an ACO that meets the quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(4)(i).

(ii) 75 percent multiplied by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b) for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(4)(ii).

(4) For performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024. An ACO that meets all the requirements for receiving shared savings payments under the ENHANCED track will receive a shared savings payment equal to a percentage of all the savings under the updated benchmark (up to the performance payment limit described in paragraph (e)(2) of this section). The percentage is as follows:

(i) 75 percent for an ACO that meets the quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(5)(i).

(ii) 75 percent multiplied by the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b) for an ACO that meets the alternative quality performance standard by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(5)(ii).

(f) * * *

(2) For performance years beginning on January 1, 2021, or January 1, 2022. * * *

(3) For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2023. For an ACO that is required to share losses with the Medicare program for expenditures over the updated benchmark, the amount of shared losses is determined as follows:

(i) If the ACO meets either the quality performance standard established in § 425.512 applicable for the performance year by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(4)(i), or the alternative quality performance standard established in § 425.512(a)(4)(ii), CMS determines the shared loss rate as follows:

(A) Calculate the product of 75 percent and the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b).

(B) Calculate the shared loss rate as 1 minus the product determined in paragraph (f)(3)(i)(A) of this section. The shared loss rate—

( 1 ) May not exceed 75 percent; and

( 2 ) May not be less than 40 percent.

(ii) If the ACO fails to meet either the quality performance standard or the alternative quality performance standard established in § 425.512 applicable for the performance year, the shared loss rate is 75 percent.

(4) For performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024. For an ACO that is required to share losses with the Medicare program for expenditures over the updated benchmark, the amount of shared losses is determined as follows:

(i) If the ACO meets either the quality performance standard established in § 425.512 applicable for the performance year by meeting the criteria specified in § 425.512(a)(2) or (a)(5)(i), or the alternative quality performance standard established in § 425.512(a)(5)(ii), CMS determines the shared loss rate as follows:

(A) Calculate the product of 75 percent and the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score calculated according to § 425.512(b).

(B) Calculate the shared loss rate as 1 minus the product determined in paragraph (f)(4)(i)(A) of this section. The shared loss rate—

( 1 ) May not exceed 75 percent; and

( 2 ) May not be less than 40 percent.

(ii) If the ACO fails to meet either the quality performance standard or the alternative quality performance standard established in § 425.512 for the applicable performance year, the shared loss rate is 75 percent.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

67. Amend § 425.611—

a. In paragraph (c)(2)(i), by removing the references “§§ 425.601(c) and 425.603(e)” and adding in its place the references “§§ 425.601(c), 425.603(e), and 425.654(a)”;

b. In paragraph (c)(2)(ii)(A), by removing the references “§§ 425.601(a)(4), 425.602(a)(4), and 425.603(c)(4)” and adding in its place the references “§§ 425.601(a)(4), 425.602(a)(4), 425.603(c)(4), and 425.652(a)(4)”;

c. In paragraph (c)(2)(ii)(B), by removing the references “§§ 425.601(c)(3) and 425.603(e)(3)” and adding in its place the references “§§ 425.601(c)(3), 425.603(e)(3), and 425.654(a)(3)”;

d. By revising paragraph (c)(2)(iii);

e. In paragraph (c)(2)(v), by removing the reference “§ 425.601(a)(5)(ii)” and adding in its place the references “§§ 425.601(a)(5)(ii) and 425.652(a)(5)(ii)” and removing the reference “§ 425.601(b)(2)” and adding in its place the references “§§ 425.601(b)(2) and 425.652(b)(2)(i)”; and

f. By revising paragraph (c)(4).

The revisions read as follows:

§ 425.611 Adjustments to Shared Savings Program calculations to address the COVID-19 pandemic.

(c) * * *

(2) * * *

(iii) Determining national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare fee-for-service program for assignable beneficiaries for purposes of capping the regional adjustment to the ACO's historical benchmark according to §§ 425.601(a)(8)(ii)(C) and 425.656(c)(3), and capping the prior savings adjustment according to § 425.652(a)(8)(iv).

(4) Calculation of total Medicare Parts A and B fee-for-service revenue of ACO participants and total Medicare Parts A and B fee-for-service expenditures for the ACO's assigned beneficiaries for purposes of identifying whether an ACO is a high revenue ACO or low revenue ACO, as defined under § 425.20, determining an ACO's eligibility for participation options according to § 425.600(d), and determining an ACO's eligibility to receive advance investment payments according to § 425.630.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

68. Amend § 425.612 by—

a. Revising paragraph (a)(1)(i)(A) introductory text; and

b. In paragraph (a)(1)(i)(A)( 1 ) by removing the phrase “The communication plan” and adding in its place the phrase “A communication plan”.

The revision reads as follows:

§ 425.612 Waivers of payment rules or other Medicare requirements.

(a) * * *

(1) * * *

(i) * * *

(A) An attestation that it has established and will make available to CMS upon request the following narratives describing how the ACO plans to implement the waiver:

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

69. Add and reserve §§ 425.614 through 425.629 to subpart G.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

70. Section 425.630 is added to subpart G to read as follows:

§ 425.630 Option to receive advance investment payments.

(a) Purpose. Advance investment payments are intended to encourage low-revenue ACOs that are inexperienced with risk to participate in the Shared Savings Program and to provide additional resources to such ACOs in order to support care improvement for underserved beneficiaries.

(b) Eligibility. An ACO is eligible to receive advance investment payments as specified in this section if CMS determines that all of the following criteria are met:

(1) The ACO is not a renewing or a re-entering ACO.

(2) The ACO has applied to participate in the Shared Savings Program under any level of the BASIC track's glide path and is eligible to participate in the Shared Savings Program.

(3) The ACO is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives.

(4) The ACO is a low revenue ACO.

(c) Application procedure. To obtain a determination regarding whether an ACO may receive advance investment payments, the ACO must submit to CMS complete supplemental information as part of its application to participate in the Shared Savings Program (filed pursuant to § 425.202) in the form and manner and by a deadline specified by CMS.

(d) Application contents and review. (1) General. An ACO must submit to CMS supplemental application information sufficient for CMS to determine whether the ACO is eligible to receive advance investment payments. In addition, the ACO must submit a proposed spend plan as part of the supplemental application information.

(2) Spend plan. The spend plan must:

(i) Describe how the ACO will spend its advance investment payments during the agreement period to build care coordination capabilities (including coordination with community-based organizations, as appropriate), address specific health disparities, and meet other criteria under this section.

(ii) Identify the categories of goods and services that will be purchased with advance investment payment funds (including any allowable uses under paragraph (e) of this section), the dollar amounts to be spent on the various categories, and such other information as may be specified by CMS.

(iii) State that the ACO has established a separate designated account for the deposit and expenditure of all advance investment payments in accordance with paragraph (e)(4) of this section.

(3) CMS review. CMS will review the supplemental application information to determine whether an ACO meets the eligibility criteria and other requirements for advance investment payments and will approve or deny the advance investment payment application accordingly. CMS may review an ACO's spend plan at any time and require the ACO to modify its spend plan to comply with the requirements of this paragraph (d) and paragraph (e) of this section.

(e) Use and management of advance investment payments. (1) Allowable uses. An ACO must use an advance investment payment to improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to beneficiaries by investing in increased staffing, health care infrastructure, and the provision of accountable care for underserved beneficiaries, which may include addressing social determinants of health. Expenditures of advance investment payments must comply with the beneficiary incentive provision at § 425.304, paragraph (e)(2) of this section, and all other applicable laws and regulations.

(2) Prohibited uses. Advance investment payments may not be used for any expense other than allowable uses under paragraph (e)(1) of this section. In the case of an ACO participating in Level E of the BASIC track, the repayment of any shared losses incurred as specified in a written notice in accordance with § 425.605(e)(2).

(3) Duration for spending payments. An ACO may spend an advance investment payment over its entire agreement period. An ACO must repay to CMS any unspent funds remaining at the end of the ACO's agreement period.

(4) Segregation of advance investment payments. An ACO must segregate advance investment payments from all other revenues by establishing and maintaining a separate account into which all advance investment payments will be deposited immediately and from which all disbursements of such funds are made only for allowable uses in accordance with this paragraph.

(f) Payment methodology. An ACO receives two types of advance investment payments: a one-time payment of $250,000 and quarterly payments calculated pursuant to the methodology defined in paragraph (f)(2) of this section. CMS notifies in writing each ACO of its determination of the amount of advance investment payment. If CMS does not make any advance investment payment, the notice will specify the reason(s) why and inform the ACO of its right to request reconsideration review in accordance with the procedures specified in subpart I of this part.

(1) Frequency of payments. An ACO will receive the one-time payment at the beginning of Performance Year 1 of the ACO's agreement period. An ACO will receive quarterly payments each quarter for the first two performance years of the ACO's agreement period. An ACO may receive no more than eight quarterly payments.

(2) Quarterly payment amount calculation methodology. CMS does all of the following in determining the quarterly payment amount prior to the start of the quarter.

(i) Determines the ACO's assigned beneficiary population. The assigned beneficiaries used in determining the quarterly payment amount are the beneficiaries most recently assigned to the ACO under § 425.400(a)(2) (for an ACO under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation) or § 425.400(a)(3) (for an ACO under prospective assignment), based on the certified ACO participant list for the relevant performance year.

(ii) Assigns each beneficiary a risk factors-based score. For each beneficiary in the assigned population identified in paragraph (f)(2)(i) of this section, CMS applies the following requirements in assigning a risk factors-based score:

(A) The risk factors-based score will be set to 100 if the beneficiary is enrolled in the Medicare Part D LIS or is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

(B) The risk factors-based score will be set to the Area Deprivation Index national percentile rank matched to the beneficiary's mailing address if the beneficiary is not enrolled in the LIS or is not dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid and sufficient data is available to match the beneficiary to an Area Deprivation Index national percentile rank.

(C) The risk factors-based score will be set to 50 if the beneficiary is not enrolled in the LIS or is not dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid and sufficient data is not available to match the beneficiary to an Area Deprivation Index national percentile rank.

(iii) Determines a beneficiary's payment amount. For each beneficiary in the assigned population identified in paragraph (f)(2)(i) of this section, CMS determines the payment amount that corresponds to the beneficiary's risk factors-based score determined in paragraph (f)(2)(ii) of this section. The beneficiary payment amount is as follows:

Table 1 to Paragraph ( f )(2)( iii ) Risk factors-based score 1-24 25-34 35-44 45-54 55-64 65-74 75-84 85-100 Payment amount $0 $20 $24 $28 $32 $36 $40 $45

(iv) Calculates the ACO's quarterly payment amount. The ACO's quarterly payment amount is the sum of the beneficiary payment amounts corresponding to each assigned beneficiary's risk factors-based score, specified in paragraph (f)(2)(iii) of this section, capped at 10,000 beneficiaries. If the ACO has more than 10,000 assigned beneficiaries according to paragraph (f)(2)(i) of this section, CMS will calculate the quarterly payment amount based on the 10,000 assigned beneficiaries with the highest risk factors-based scores determined according to paragraph (f)(2)(ii) of this section.

(g) Recoupment and recovery of advance investment payments, and notice of bankruptcy. (1) CMS will recoup advance investment payments made to an ACO from any shared savings the ACO earns until CMS has recouped in full the amount of advance investment payments made to the ACO. For both renewing and re-entering ACOs, CMS will carry forward any remaining balance owed to subsequent performance year(s) in which the ACO achieves shared savings, including in any performance year(s) in a subsequent agreement period.

(2) If the amount of shared savings earned by the ACO is revised upward by CMS for any reason, CMS will reduce the redetermined amount of shared savings by the amount of advance investment payments made to the ACO as of the date of the redetermination. If the amount of shared savings earned by the ACO is revised downward by CMS for any reason, the ACO will not receive a refund of any portion of the advance investment payments previously recouped or otherwise repaid.

(3) Except as provided for in paragraphs (g)(4) of this section and § 425.316(e)(3), for each performance year, CMS will not recover an amount of advance investment payments greater than the shared savings earned by an ACO in that performance year.

(4) If an ACO terminates its participation agreement during the agreement period in which it received an advance investment payment, the ACO must repay all advance investment payments it received. CMS will provide written notification to the ACO of the amount due and the ACO must pay such amount no later than 90 days after the receipt of such notification.

(5) In the event of bankruptcy—

(i) If an ACO has filed a bankruptcy petition, whether voluntary or involuntary, the ACO must provide written notice of the bankruptcy to CMS and to the U.S. Attorney's Office in the district where the bankruptcy was filed, unless final payment for the agreement period has been made by either CMS or the ACO and all administrative or judicial review proceedings relating to any payments under the Shared Savings Program have been fully and finally resolved.

(ii) The notice of bankruptcy must be sent by certified mail no later than 5 days after the petition has been filed and must contain a copy of the filed bankruptcy petition (including its docket number). The notice to CMS must be addressed to the CMS Office of Financial Management at 7500 Security Boulevard, Mailstop C3-01-24, Baltimore, MD 21244 or such other address as may be specified on the CMS website for purposes of receiving such notices.

(h) Termination of advance investment payments. (1) General. Except as provided in paragraph (h)(2) of this section, CMS may terminate an ACO's advance investment payments if the ACO—

(i) Fails to comply with the requirements of this section; or

(ii) Meets any of the grounds for ACO termination set forth in § 425.218(b).

(2) Eligibility sanction. CMS will terminate an ACO's advance investment payments in accordance with § 425.316(e) if the ACO no longer meets the eligibility requirements specified in paragraphs (b)(3) and (b)(4) of this section.

(3) No pre-termination actions. CMS may immediately terminate an ACO's advance investment payments without taking any of the pre-termination actions set forth in § 425.216.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

71. Add and reserve §§ 425.631 through 425.649 to subpart G.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

72. Section 425.650 is added to subpart G to read as follows:

§ 425.650 Benchmarking methodology.

(a) Scope and purpose. The methodology by which CMS establishes, adjusts, updates and resets an ACO's historical benchmark is described within this subpart G. The benchmarking methodology for agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, is specified in §§ 425.601, 425.602, and 425.603. The benchmarking methodology for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024, is specified in §§ 425.652 through 425.660.

(b) [Reserved]

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

73. Section 425.652 is added to subpart G to read as follows:

§ 425.652 Establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

(a) Computing per capita Medicare Part A and Part B benchmark expenditures for an ACO's first agreement period. For agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, in computing an ACO's historical benchmark for its first agreement period under the Shared Savings Program, CMS determines the per capita Parts A and B fee-for-service expenditures for beneficiaries that would have been assigned to the ACO in any of the 3 most recent years prior to the start of the agreement period using the ACO participant TINs identified before the start of the agreement period as required under § 425.118(a) and the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the first performance year of the agreement period as required under § 425.226(a)(1). CMS does all of the following:

(1) Calculates the payment amounts included in Parts A and B fee-for-service claims using a 3-month claims run out with a completion factor.

(i) This calculation excludes indirect medical education (IME) and disproportionate share hospital (DSH) payments, and the supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and Puerto Rico hospitals.

(ii) This calculation includes individually beneficiary identifiable final payments made under a demonstration, pilot or time limited program.

(2) Makes separate expenditure calculations for each of the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(3) Adjusts expenditures for changes in severity and case mix using prospective HCC risk scores.

(4) Truncates an assigned beneficiary's total annual Parts A and B fee-for-service per capita expenditures at the 99th percentile of national Medicare fee-for-service expenditures for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to each benchmark year in order to minimize variation from catastrophically large claims.

(5) Trends forward expenditures for each benchmark year (BY1 and BY2) to the third benchmark year (BY3) dollars using a blend of national and regional growth rates.

(i) To trend forward the benchmark, CMS makes separate calculations for expenditure categories for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(A) ESRD.

(B) Disabled.

(C) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(D) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(ii) National growth rates are computed using CMS Office of the Actuary national Medicare expenditure data for each of the years making up the historical benchmark for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to each benchmark year.

(iii) Regional growth rates are computed using expenditures for the ACO's regional service area for each of the years making up the historical benchmark as follows:

(A) Determine the counties included in the ACO's regional service area based on the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for the relevant benchmark year.

(B) Determine the ACO's regional expenditures as specified under § 425.654 of this section.

(iv) The national and regional growth rates are blended together by taking a weighted average of the two. The weight applied to the—

(A) National growth rate is calculated as the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area for BY3 that are assigned to the ACO in BY3, as calculated in paragraph (a)(5)(v) of this section; and

(B) Regional growth rate is equal to 1 minus the weight applied to the national growth rate.

(v) CMS calculates the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO by doing all of the following:

(A) Calculating the county-level share of assignable beneficiaries that are assigned to the ACO for each county in the ACO's regional service area. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for the assignment window corresponding to BY3 that is consistent with the assignment window that applies under the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

(B) Weighting the county-level shares according to the ACO's proportion of assigned beneficiaries in the county, determined by the number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in the county in relation to the ACO's total number of assigned beneficiaries.

(C) Aggregating the weighted county-level shares for all counties in the ACO's regional service area.

(6) Restates BY1 and BY2 trended and risk adjusted expenditures using BY3 proportions of ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(7) Weights each year of the benchmark for an ACO's initial agreement period using the following percentages:

(i) BY3 at 60 percent.

(ii) BY2 at 30 percent.

(iii) BY1 at 10 percent.

(8) Adjusts the historical benchmark based on the ACO's regional service area expenditures (as specified under § 425.656), or for savings generated by the ACO, if any, in the 3 most recent years prior to the start of the agreement period, if applicable (as specified under § 425.658), or a combination of these two adjustments. CMS does all of the following to determine the adjustment(s) applied to the historical benchmark:

(i) Computes the regional adjustment in accordance with § 425.656 and the prior savings adjustment in accordance with § 425.658.

(ii) If an ACO is not eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment under § 425.658(b)(3)(i), the ACO will receive the regional adjustment to its benchmark as described in § 425.656.

(iii) If an ACO is eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment, CMS compares the pro-rated positive average per capita savings amount calculated in § 425.658(b)(3)(ii) with the regional adjustment described in § 425.656(c), expressed as a single per capita value by taking a person-year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment type-specific regional adjustment values.

(A) If the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is negative or zero, calculate the sum of the regional adjustment value and the pro-rated positive average per capita savings amount.

( 1 ) If the sum is positive, the ACO will receive a prior savings adjustment in place of the negative regional adjustment equal to the lesser of 50 percent of the positive sum and the cap described in paragraph (a)(8)(iv) of this section. The adjustment will be applied as a flat dollar amount to the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

( 2 ) If the sum is negative, the ACO will receive a reduced negative regional adjustment amount equal to the negative sum. The adjustment will be applied as a flat dollar amount to the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(B) If the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is positive, the ACO will receive an adjustment to the benchmark equal to the higher of the following:

( 1 ) The positive regional adjustment amount. The adjustment will be calculated as described in § 425.656(c) and applied separately to the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

( 2 ) A prior savings adjustment equal to the lesser of 50 percent of the pro-rated positive average per capita savings amount described in § 425.658(b)(3)(ii) and the cap described in paragraph (a)(8)(iv) of this section. The adjustment will be applied as a flat dollar amount to the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iv) The cap on the prior savings adjustment calculated in either paragraph (a)(8)(iii)(A)( 1 ) or paragraph (a)(8)(iii)(B)( 2 ) of this section is equal to 5 percent of national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare fee-for-service program in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3 using data from the CMS Office of the Actuary and expressed as a single value by taking a person-year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment type-specific values.

(9) For the second and each subsequent performance year during the term of the agreement period, the ACO's benchmark is adjusted for the following, as applicable: For the addition and removal of ACO participants or ACO providers/suppliers in accordance with § 425.118(b), for a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection under § 425.226(a)(1), and for a change to the beneficiary assignment methodology specified in subpart E of this part. To adjust the benchmark, CMS does the following:

(i) Takes into account the expenditures of beneficiaries who would have been assigned to the ACO in any of the 3 most recent years prior to the start of the agreement period.

(ii) Redetermines the regional adjustment amount under § 425.656 according to the ACO's assigned beneficiaries for BY3, and based on the assignable population of beneficiaries identified for the assignment window corresponding to BY3 that is consistent with the assignment window that applies under the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.226(a)(1).

(iii) Redetermines the offset factor used in determining the negative regional adjustment amount under § 425.656(c)(4) and (5).

(iv) Redetermines the proration factor used in calculating the prior savings adjustment under § 425.658(b)(3)(ii) to account for changes in the ACO's assigned beneficiary population in the benchmark years of the ACO's current agreement period due to the addition and removal of ACO participants or ACO providers/suppliers in accordance with § 425.118(b), a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection under § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), or changes to the beneficiary assignment methodology under subpart E of this part.

(v) In accordance with paragraph (a)(8) of this section, CMS redetermines the adjustment to the historical benchmark based on the redetermined regional adjustment (as specified under § 425.656), or the prior savings adjustment (as specified under § 425.658), or a combination of these two adjustments.

(10) The historical benchmark is further adjusted at the time of reconciliation for a performance year to account for changes in severity and case mix of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population as described under §§ 425.605(a) and 425.610(a).

(b) Updating the benchmark. For all agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, CMS updates the historical benchmark annually for each year of the agreement period using a three-way blend calculated as a weighted average of a two-way blend of national and regional growth rates determined after the end of each performance year and a fixed projected growth rate determined at the beginning of the ACO's agreement period called the Accountable Care Prospective Trend (ACPT).

(1) To update the benchmark, CMS makes separate calculations for expenditure categories for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(i) ESRD.

(ii) Disabled.

(iii) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iv) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(2) CMS computes the two-way blend of national and regional growth rates as follows:

(i) Computes national growth rates using CMS Office of the Actuary national Medicare expenditure data for BY3 and the performance year for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to each year.

(ii) Computes regional growth rates using expenditures for the ACO's regional service area for BY3 and the performance year, computed as follows:

(A) Determine the counties included in the ACO's regional service area based on the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for the year.

(B) Determine the ACO's regional expenditures as specified under § 425.654.

(iii) The national and regional growth rates are blended together by taking a weighted average of the two. The weight applied to the—

(A) National growth rate is calculated as the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO for the applicable performance year as specified in paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of this section; and

(B) Regional growth rate is equal to 1 minus the weight applied to the national growth rate.

(iv) CMS calculates the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO by doing all of the following:

(A) Calculating the county-level share of assignable beneficiaries that are assigned to the ACO for each county in the ACO's regional service area. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for the assignment window corresponding to the performance year that is consistent with the assignment window that applies under the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

(B) Weighting the county-level shares according to the ACO's proportion of assigned beneficiaries in the county, determined by the number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in the county in relation to the ACO's total number of assigned beneficiaries.

(C) Aggregating the weighted county-level shares for all counties in the ACO's regional service area.

(3) CMS computes the ACPT as described in § 425.660.

(4) The two-way blend computed under paragraph (b)(2) of this section and the ACPT are blended together by taking a weighted average of the two.

(i) Absent unforeseen circumstances, the weight applied to the components of the blend is as follows—

(A) Two-way blend is equal to two-thirds; and

(B) ACPT is equal to one-third.

(ii) CMS has sole discretion to determine whether an unforeseen circumstance exists that warrants a reduction to the weight of the ACPT and the reduced weight that will apply to the ACPT.

(5) If an ACO's average per capita Medicare expenditures for the performance year are above its updated benchmark for the year determined as described in paragraph (b)(4) of this section by at least the MLR or negative MSR established for the ACO, CMS will compute a recalculated updated benchmark using the two-way blend described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section.

(i) If the ACO's average per capita Medicare expenditures for the performance year are above the recalculated updated benchmark by a smaller amount than the amount by which they are above the updated benchmark determined as described in paragraph (b)(4) of this section, CMS will use the recalculated updated benchmark to determine the following:

(A) The ACO's responsibility for sharing losses with the Medicare program for ACOs in two-sided models as described under §§ 425.605 and 425.610.

(B) The ACO's financial performance for purposes of monitoring ACO financial performance as described under § 425.316(d).

(ii) If the ACO's average per capita Medicare expenditures for the performance year are below the recalculated updated benchmark, the ACO will neither be responsible for sharing losses with the Medicare program nor eligible for sharing in savings.

(c) Resetting the benchmark. (1) An ACO's benchmark is reset at the start of each subsequent agreement period.

(2) For second or subsequent agreements periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, CMS establishes, adjusts, and updates the rebased historical benchmark in accordance with paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section except that rather than weighting each year of the benchmark using the percentages provided in paragraph (a)(7) of this section, each benchmark year is weighted equally.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

74. Section 425.654 is added to subpart G to read as follows:

§ 425.654 Calculating county expenditures and regional expenditures.

(a) Calculating county expenditures. For agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, CMS does all of the following to determine risk adjusted county fee-for-service expenditures for use in calculating the ACO's regional fee-for-service expenditures:

(1)(i) Determines average county fee-for-service expenditures based on expenditures for the assignable population of beneficiaries in each county in the ACO's regional service area. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for the assignment window corresponding to the relevant benchmark or performance year that is consistent with the assignment window that applies under the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

(ii) Makes separate expenditure calculations for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(A) ESRD.

(B) Disabled.

(C) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(D) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(2) Calculates assignable beneficiary expenditures using the payment amounts included in Parts A and B fee-for-service claims with dates of service in the 12-month calendar year for the relevant benchmark or performance year, using a 3-month claims run out with a completion factor. The calculation—

(i) Excludes IME and DSH payments, and the supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and Puerto Rico hospitals; and

(ii) Considers individually beneficiary identifiable final payments made under a demonstration, pilot or time limited program.

(3) Truncates a beneficiary's total annual Parts A and B fee-for-service per capita expenditures at the 99th percentile of national Medicare fee-for-service expenditures for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year that corresponds to the relevant benchmark or performance year, in order to minimize variation from catastrophically large claims.

(4) Adjusts fee-for-service expenditures for severity and case mix of assignable beneficiaries in the county using prospective HCC risk scores. The calculation is made according to the following populations of beneficiaries:

(i) ESRD.

(ii) Disabled.

(iii) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iv) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(b) Calculating regional expenditures. For all agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, CMS calculates an ACO's risk adjusted regional expenditures by:

(1) Weighting the risk adjusted county-level fee-for-service expenditures determined under paragraph (a) of this section according to the ACO's proportion of assigned beneficiaries in the county, determined by the number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries in the applicable population (according to Medicare enrollment type) residing in the county in relation to the ACO's total number of assigned beneficiaries in the applicable population (according to Medicare enrollment type) for the relevant benchmark or performance year for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(i) ESRD.

(ii) Disabled.

(iii) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iv) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(2) Aggregating the values determined under paragraph (b)(1) of this section for each population of beneficiaries (according to Medicare enrollment type) across all counties within the ACO's regional service area.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

75. Section 425.656 is added to subpart G to read as follows:

§ 425.656 Calculating the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark.

(a) General. This section describes the methodology for calculating the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark based on the ACO's regional service area expenditures, making separate calculations for the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries. This section applies to regional adjustment calculations for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

(b) Calculation of an average per capita expenditure amount for the ACO's regional service area. To compute an average per capita expenditure amount for the ACO's regional service area, CMS does all of the following:

(1) Determines the counties included in the ACO's regional service area based on the ACO's BY3 assigned beneficiary population.

(2) Determines the ACO's regional expenditures as specified under § 425.654 for BY3.

(3) Adjusts for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for BY3 and the assignable population of beneficiaries for the ACO's regional service area for BY3. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified using the assignment window corresponding to BY3 that is consistent with the assignment window that applies under the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

(c) Calculation of the adjustment. To calculate the adjustment, CMS does all of the following:

(1) Determines the difference between the average per capita amount of expenditures for the ACO's regional service area as specified under paragraph (b)(1) of this section and the average per capita amount of the ACO's historical benchmark determined under § 425.652(a)(1) through (7) and (c)(2), for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(i) ESRD.

(ii) Disabled.

(iii) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iv) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(2) Applies a percentage, as determined in paragraph (d) of this section.

(3) Caps the per capita dollar amount for each Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries) calculated under paragraph (c)(2) of this section at a dollar amount equal to a percentage of national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare fee-for-service program in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries in that enrollment type identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3 using data from the CMS Office of the Actuary. The cap is applied as follows:

(i) For positive adjustments, the per capita dollar amount for a Medicare enrollment type is capped at 5 percent of the national per capita expenditure amount for the enrollment type for BY3.

(ii) For negative adjustments, the per capita dollar amount for a Medicare enrollment type is capped at negative 1.5 percent of the national per capita expenditure amount for the enrollment type for BY3.

(4) For negative adjustments, CMS will multiply the regional adjustments calculated in paragraphs (c)(2) or (3) of this section by 1 minus an offset factor equal to the sum of the following—

(i) Proportion of the ACO's BY3 assigned beneficiaries that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid; and

(ii) The difference between the ACO's weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 taken across the four Medicare enrollment types and 1. When calculating the weighted average prospective HCC risk score, the weight applied to the prospective HCC risk score for BY3 for each Medicare enrollment type is equal to the product of the BY3 per capita expenditures for that enrollment type and the BY3 person years for that enrollment type.

(5) The offset factor described in paragraph (c)(4) of this section is subject to a minimum value of zero (representing no offset to the negative regional adjustment) and a maximum value of 1 (representing a full offset to the negative regional adjustment).

(d) Phase-in of weights used in regional adjustment calculation. (1) The first time that an ACO's benchmark is adjusted based on the ACO's regional service area expenditures, CMS calculates the regional adjustment as follows:

(i) Using 35 percent of the difference between the average per capita amount of expenditures for the ACO's regional service area and the average per capita amount of the ACO's initial or rebased historical benchmark, if the ACO is determined to have lower spending than the ACO's regional service area.

(ii) Using 15 percent of the difference between the average per capita amount of expenditures for the ACO's regional service area and the average per capita amount of the ACO's initial or rebased historical benchmark, if the ACO is determined to have higher spending than the ACO's regional service area.

(2) The second time that an ACO's benchmark is adjusted based on the ACO's regional service area expenditures, CMS calculates the regional adjustment as follows:

(i) Using 50 percent of the difference between the average per capita amount of expenditures for the ACO's regional service area and the average per capita amount of the ACO's rebased historical benchmark if the ACO is determined to have lower spending than the ACO's regional service area.

(ii) Using 25 percent of the difference between the average per capita amount of expenditures for the ACO's regional service area and the average per capita amount of the ACO's rebased historical benchmark if the ACO is determined to have higher spending than the ACO's regional service area.

(3) The third time that an ACO's benchmark is adjusted based on the ACO's regional service area expenditures, CMS calculates the regional adjustment as follows:

(i) Using 50 percent of the difference between the average per capita amount of expenditures for the ACO's regional service area and the average per capita amount of the ACO's rebased historical benchmark if the ACO is determined to have lower spending than the ACO's regional service area.

(ii) Using 35 percent of the difference between the average per capita amount of expenditures for the ACO's regional service area and the average per capita amount of the ACO's rebased historical benchmark if the ACO is determined to have higher spending than the ACO's regional service area.

(4) The fourth or subsequent time that an ACO's benchmark is adjusted based on the ACO's regional service area expenditures, CMS calculates the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark using 50 percent of the difference between the average per capita amount of expenditures for the ACO's regional service area and the average per capita amount of the ACO's rebased historical benchmark.

(5) To determine if an ACO has lower or higher spending compared to the ACO's regional service area, CMS does the following:

(i) Multiplies the difference between the average per capita amount of expenditures for the ACO's regional service area and the average per capita amount of the ACO's historical benchmark for each population of beneficiaries (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries) as calculated under paragraph (c)(1) of this section by the applicable proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries) for BY3 of the historical benchmark.

(ii) Sums the amounts determined in paragraph (d)(5)(i) of this section across the populations of beneficiaries (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries).

(iii) If the resulting sum is a net positive value, the ACO is considered to have lower spending compared to the ACO's regional service area. If the resulting sum is a net negative value, the ACO is considered to have higher spending compared to the ACO's regional service area.

(iv) If during the term of the agreement period CMS adjusts the ACO's benchmark, as specified in § 425.652(a)(9), CMS redetermines whether the ACO is considered to have lower spending or higher spending compared to the ACO's regional service area for purposes of determining the percentage in paragraphs (d)(1) through (3) of this section used in calculating the regional adjustment.

(e) Special rules for determining the weights used in the regional adjustment calculation for a re-entering ACO. For a re-entering ACO whose prior agreement period benchmark was calculated according to § 425.603(c), CMS determines the weight used in the regional adjustment calculation described in paragraphs (b) through (d) of this section by considering the agreement period the ACO is entering into according to § 425.600(f) in combination with either of the following—

(1) The weight previously applied to calculate the regional adjustment to the ACO's benchmark under § 425.603(c)(9) in its most recent prior agreement period; or

(2) For a new ACO identified as a re-entering ACO, CMS considers the weight previously applied to calculate the regional adjustment to the benchmark under § 425.603(c)(9) in its most recent prior agreement period of the ACO in which the majority of the new ACO's participants were participating previously.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

76. Section 425.658 is added to subpart G to read as follows:

§ 425.658 Calculating the prior savings adjustment to the historical benchmark.

(a) General. For agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, CMS calculates an adjustment to the historical benchmark to account for savings generated in the 3 years prior to the start of the ACO's current agreement period for renewing or re-entering ACOs that were reconciled for one or more performance years in the Shared Savings Program during this period.

(b) Calculate average per capita savings amount. (1) Calculate total per capita savings or losses for each performance year during the 3 years prior to the start of the ACO's current agreement period. CMS applies the following requirements in determining the amount of per capita savings or losses for each performance year:

(i) Per capita savings or losses will be set to zero for a performance year if the ACO was not reconciled for the performance year.

(ii) If an ACO generated savings for a performance year but was not eligible to receive a shared savings payment for that year due to noncompliance with the requirements of this part, per capita savings for that year will be set to zero.

(iii) For a new ACO identified as re-entering ACO, per capita savings or losses will be determined based on the per capita savings or losses of the ACO in which the majority of the ACO's ACO participants were participating.

(2) Take the simple average of the per capita savings or losses calculated in paragraph (b)(1) of this section, including values of zero, if applicable.

(3) Determine the ACO's eligibility for the prior savings adjustment as follows:

(i) If the average per capita amount computed in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is less than or equal to zero, the ACO is not eligible to receive an adjustment for prior savings. The ACO will receive the regional adjustment to its benchmark as described in § 425.656.

(ii) If the average per capita amount computed in paragraph (b)(2) of this section is positive, apply a proration factor to account for any upward growth in the ACO's assigned population in the benchmark years of the ACO's current agreement period as compared to the size of the assigned population when the ACO was reconciled for the corresponding performance years in its prior agreement period.

(c) Applicability of the prior savings adjustment. CMS compares the pro-rated average per capita savings amount determined in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section with the regional adjustment described in § 425.656(c), to determine the applicability of the prior savings adjustment, the regional adjustment or a combination of these two adjustments in accordance with § 425.652(a)(8).

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

77. Section 425.660 is added to subpart G to read as follows:

§ 425.660 Accountable Care Prospective Trend (ACPT).

(a) General. For agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, CMS incorporates a fixed projected growth rate determined at the beginning of the ACO's agreement period called the Accountable Care Prospective Trend (ACPT) into the blended update factor described in § 425.652(b) when updating an ACO's benchmark for each performance year of the agreement period.

(b) Determination of ACPT. An ACPT is a flat dollar amount calculated using one or more annualized growth rates based on national fee-for-service Medicare expenditures projected by the CMS Office of the Actuary. In determining the ACPT for an enrollment type for each performance year, CMS does all of the following:

(1) Projects per capita growth in Parts A and B fee-for-service expenditures for benchmark year 3 (BY3) and each performance year of the ACO's agreement period. The calculation—

(i) Excludes IME and DSH payments, and the supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and Puerto Rico hospitals; and

(ii) Makes separate expenditure calculations for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(A) ESRD.

(B) Aged/Disabled.

(2) Calculates one or more annualized growth rates for the population of beneficiaries described in paragraph (b)(1)(ii)(A) of this section (the ESRD ACPT) and one or more annualized growth rates for the population of beneficiaries described in paragraph (b)(1)(ii)(B) of this section (the Aged/Disabled ACPT). These annualized growth rates will remain fixed over the ACO's agreement period. The annualized growth rate is an annual rate of growth in projected expenditures during the ACO's 5-year agreement period relative to BY3, calculated as follows—

(i) Using a uniform annualized projected rate of growth over each of the 5 performance years of the 5-year agreement period; or

(ii) If annualization as specified in paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section is determined not to reasonably fit the anticipated growth curve, CMS will apply an alternative annualization technique using two or more annualized growth rates reflecting the projected rates of growth during the 5 performance years comprising the 5-year agreement period.

(3) For each performance year, multiplies the applicable annualized growth rate described in paragraph (b)(2) of this section by BY3 truncated national per capita fee-for-service Medicare expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for each Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries) identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3 to express the annualized growth rate as a flat dollar amount as follows:

(i) The ESRD ACPT is used for the ESRD population.

(ii) The Aged/Disabled ACPT is used for the following populations: disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(4) Adjusts the flat dollar amounts described in paragraph (b)(3) of this section for each performance year for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's BY3 assigned beneficiary population and the national assignable FFS population for each Medicare enrollment type identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3.

(5) Divides the risk adjusted flat dollar amounts described in paragraph (b)(4) of this section by the ACO's historical benchmark expenditures described in § 425.652(a) for each Medicare enrollment type to calculate the percent increase to be included in the blended update factor described in § 425.652(b)(4).

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

78. Amend § 425.702 by adding paragraph (c)(2)(iii) to read as follows:

§ 425.702 Aggregate reports.

(c) * * *

(2) * * *

(iii) As an organized health care arrangement (as defined at 45 CFR 160.103), and the request reflects the minimum data necessary for the ACO to conduct health care operations work that falls within the first or second paragraph of the definition of health care operations at 45 CFR 164.501 on behalf of the organized health care arrangement.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

79. Amend § 425.704 by revising paragraph (b) introductory text and adding paragraph (b)(3) to read as follows:

§ 425.704 Beneficiary-identifiable claims data.

(b) The ACO must certify that it is requesting claims data about any of the following:

(3) The patients of the organized health care arrangement (as defined at 45 CFR 160.103) in which the ACO is participating with its ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers, and the request reflects the minimum data necessary for the ACO to conduct health care operations work that falls within the first or second paragraph of the definition of health care operations at 45 CFR 164.501 on behalf of the organized health care arrangement.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

80. Amend § 425.800 in paragraph (a)(4) by removing the references “§§ 425.601, 425.602, 425.603, 425.604, 425.605, 425.606, and 425.610” and adding in its place the references “§§ 425.601, 425.602, 425.603, 425.604, 425.605, 425.606, 425.610, and 425.652”.
