G. Medicare Shared Savings Program

1. Executive Summary and Background

a. Purpose

Eligible groups of providers and suppliers, including physicians, hospitals, and other healthcare providers, may participate in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Shared Savings Program) by forming or joining an accountable care organization (ACO) and in so doing agree to become accountable for the total cost and quality of care provided under Traditional Medicare to an assigned population of Medicare fee-for-service (FFS) beneficiaries. Under the Shared Savings Program, providers and suppliers that participate in an ACO continue to receive traditional Medicare FFS payments under Parts A and B, and the ACO may be eligible to receive a shared savings payment if it meets specified quality and savings requirements, and in some instances may be required to share in losses if it increases health care spending.

As of January 1, 2023, 10.9 million people with Medicare receive care from one of the 573,126 health care providers in the 456 ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program, the largest value-based care program in the country. 147 While the Shared Savings Program experienced a decrease in the number of ACOs and assigned beneficiaries for 2023, the policies finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69777 through 69968) are expected to grow participation in the program for 2024 and beyond, when many of the new policies are set to go into effect. These policies are expected to drive growth in participation, particularly in rural and underserved areas, promote equity, advance alignment across accountable care initiatives, and increase the number of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs participating in the program by up to four million over the next several years. 148 Accordingly, we expect these recently finalized changes will support CMS in achieving its goal of having 100 percent of people with Original Medicare in a care relationship with accountability for quality and total cost of care by 2030. 149

147 Refer to CMS, Shared Savings Program Fast Facts—As of January 1, 2023, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2023-shared-savings-program-fast-facts.pdf .

148 See CMS Press Release, “CMS Announces Increase in 2023 in Organizations and Beneficiaries Benefiting from Coordinated Care in Accountable Care Relationship”, January 17, 2023, available at https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/cms-announces-increase-2023-organizations-and-beneficiaries-benefiting-coordinated-care-accountable .

149 Ibid. See also, Seshamani M, Fowler E, Brooks-LaSure C. Building On The CMS Strategic Vision: Working Together For A Stronger Medicare. Health Affairs. January 11, 2022. Available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/forefront.20220110.198444 . CMS, Innovation Center Strategy Refresh, available at https://innovation.cms.gov/strategic-direction-whitepaper (Innovation Center Strategic Objective 1: Drive Accountable Care, pages 13-17).

Section III.G. of this proposed rule addresses changes to the Shared Savings Program regulations to further advance Medicare's overall value-based care strategy of growth, alignment, and equity, and to respond to concerns raised by ACOs and other interested parties. We propose changes to the quality performance standard and reporting requirements under the Alternative Payment Model (APM) Performance Pathway (APP) within the Quality Payment Program (QPP) that would continue to move ACOs toward digital measurement of quality and align with the QPP. Further, the policy proposals would add a third step to the step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology under which we would use an expanded period of time to identify whether a beneficiary has met the requirement for having received a primary care service from a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO to allow additional beneficiaries to be eligible for assignment, as well as to propose related changes to how we identify assignable beneficiaries used in certain Shared Savings Program calculations. Additionally, we are proposing updates to the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment to remain consistent with billing and coding guidelines. We also propose refinements to the financial benchmarking methodology for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years to cap the risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area when calculating regional trends used to update the historical benchmark at the time of financial reconciliation for symmetry with the cap on ACO risk score growth; apply the same CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology applicable to the calendar year corresponding to the performance year in calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for each benchmark year; further mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustment on the benchmark to encourage participation by ACOs caring for medically complex, high-cost beneficiaries; and specify the circumstances in which CMS would recalculate the prior savings adjustment for changes in values used in benchmark calculations due to compliance action taken to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, or as a result of the issuance of a revised initial determination of financial performance for a previous performance year following a reopening of ACO shared savings and shared losses calculations. We are also proposing to refine our policies for the newly established advance investment payments (AIP) and make updates to other programmatic areas including the program's eligibility requirements and make timely technical changes to the regulations for clarity and consistency. Lastly, we seek comment on potential future developments to Shared Savings Program policies, including with respect to incorporating a new track that would offer a higher level of risk and potential reward than currently available under the ENHANCED track, refining the three-way blended benchmark update factor and the prior savings adjustment, and promoting ACO and community-based organization (CBO) collaboration.

b. Statutory and Regulatory Background on the Shared Savings Program

On March 23, 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Pub. L. 111-148) was enacted, followed by enactment of the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (Pub. L. 111-152) on March 30, 2010, which amended certain provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (hereinafter collectively referred to as “the Affordable Care Act”). Section 3022 of the Affordable Care Act amended Title XVIII of the Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq. ) by adding section 1899 of the Act to establish the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Shared Savings Program) to facilitate coordination and cooperation among healthcare providers to improve the quality of care for Medicare FFS beneficiaries and reduce the rate of growth in expenditures under Medicare Parts A and B. (See 42 U.S.C. 1395jjj.)

Section 1899 of the Act has been amended through subsequent legislation. The requirements for assignment of Medicare FFS beneficiaries to ACOs participating under the program were amended by the 21st Century Cures Act (the CURES Act) (Pub. L. 114-255, December 13, 2016). The Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 (Pub. L. 115-123, February 9, 2018), further amended section 1899 of the Act to provide for the following: expanded use of telehealth services by physicians or practitioners participating in an applicable ACO to furnish services to prospectively assigned beneficiaries; greater flexibility in the assignment of Medicare FFS beneficiaries to ACOs by allowing ACOs in tracks under retrospective beneficiary assignment a choice of prospective assignment for the agreement period; permitting Medicare FFS beneficiaries to voluntarily identify an ACO professional as their primary care provider and requiring that such beneficiaries be notified of the ability to make and change such identification, and mandating that any such voluntary identification will supersede claims-based assignment; and allowing ACOs under certain two-sided models to establish CMS-approved beneficiary incentive programs.

The Shared Savings Program regulations are codified at 42 CFR part 425. The final rule establishing the Shared Savings Program appeared in the November 2, 2011 Federal Register (Medicare Program; Medicare Shared Savings Program: Accountable Care Organizations; final rule (76 FR 67802) (hereinafter referred to as the “November 2011 final rule”)). A subsequent major update to the program rules appeared in the June 9, 2015 Federal Register (Medicare Program; Medicare Shared Savings Program: Accountable Care Organizations; final rule (80 FR 32692) (hereinafter referred to as the “June 2015 final rule”)). The final rule entitled, “Medicare Program; Medicare Shared Savings Program; Accountable Care Organizations—Revised Benchmark Rebasing Methodology, Facilitating Transition to Performance-Based Risk, and Administrative Finality of Financial Calculations,” which addressed changes related to the program's financial benchmark methodology, appeared in the June 10, 2016 Federal Register (81 FR 37950) (hereinafter referred to as the “June 2016 final rule”). A final rule, “Medicare Program; Revisions to Payment Policies Under the Physician Fee Schedule and Other Revisions to Part B for CY 2019; Medicare Shared Savings Program Requirements; Quality Payment Program; Medicaid Promoting Interoperability Program; Quality Payment Program—Extreme and Uncontrollable Circumstance Policy for the 2019 MIPS Payment Year; Provisions From the Medicare Shared Savings Program—Accountable Care Organizations—Pathways to Success; and Expanding the Use of Telehealth Services for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder Under the Substance Use-Disorder Prevention That Promotes Opioid Recovery and Treatment (SUPPORT) for Patients and Communities Act”, appeared in the November 23, 2018 Federal Register (83 FR 59452) (hereinafter referred to as the “November 2018 final rule” or the “CY 2019 PFS final rule”). In the November 2018 final rule, we finalized a voluntary 6-month extension for existing ACOs whose participation agreements would otherwise expire on December 31, 2018; allowed beneficiaries greater flexibility in designating their primary care provider and in the use of that designation for purposes of assigning the beneficiary to an ACO if the clinician they align with is participating in an ACO; revised the definition of primary care services used in beneficiary assignment; provided relief for ACOs and their clinicians impacted by extreme and uncontrollable circumstances in performance year 2018 and subsequent years; established a new Certified Electronic Health Record Technology (CEHRT) use threshold requirement; and reduced the Shared Savings Program quality measure set from 31 to 23 measures (83 FR 59940 through 59990 and 59707 through 59715).

A final rule redesigning the Shared Savings Program appeared in the December 31, 2018 Federal Register (Medicare Program: Medicare Shared Savings Program; Accountable Care Organizations—Pathways to Success and Uncontrollable Circumstances Policies for Performance Year 2017; final rule (83 FR 67816) (hereinafter referred to as the “December 2018 final rule”)). In the December 2018 final rule, we finalized a number of policies for the Shared Savings Program, including a redesign of the participation options available under the program to encourage ACOs to transition to two-sided models; new tools to support coordination of care across settings and strengthen beneficiary engagement; and revisions to ensure rigorous benchmarking.

In the interim final rule with comment period (IFC) entitled “Medicare and Medicaid Programs; Policy and Regulatory Revisions in Response to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency”, which was effective on the March 31, 2020 date of display and appeared in the April 6, 2020 Federal Register (85 FR 19230) (hereinafter referred to as the “March 31, 2020 COVID-19 IFC”), we removed the restriction that prevented the application of the Shared Savings Program extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy for disasters that occur during the quality reporting period if the reporting period is extended to offer relief under the Shared Savings Program to all ACOs that may be unable to completely and accurately report quality data for 2019 due to the PHE for COVID-19 (85 FR 19267 and 19268).

In the IFC entitled “Medicare and Medicaid Programs; Basic Health Program, and Exchanges; Additional Policy and Regulatory Revisions in Response to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency and Delay of Certain Reporting Requirements for the Skilled Nursing Facility Quality Reporting Program” which was effective on May 8, 2020, and appeared in the May 8, 2020 Federal Register (85 FR 27573 through 27587) (hereinafter referred to as the “May 8, 2020 COVID-19 IFC”), we modified Shared Savings Program policies to: (1) allow ACOs whose agreement periods expired on December 31, 2020, the option to extend their existing agreement period by 1-year, and allow ACOs in the BASIC track's glide path the option to elect to maintain their current level of participation for performance year 2021; (2) adjust program calculations to remove payment amounts for episodes of care for treatment of COVID-19; and (3) expand the definition of primary care services for purposes of determining beneficiary assignment to include telehealth codes for virtual check-ins, e-visits, and telephonic communication. We also clarified the applicability of the program's extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy to mitigate shared losses for the period of the PHE for COVID-19 starting in January 2020.

We have also made use of the annual CY PFS rules to address quality reporting for the Shared Savings Program and certain other issues. For summaries of certain policies finalized in prior PFS rules, refer to the CY 2020 PFS proposed rule (84 FR 40705), the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84717), the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65253 and 65254), and the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69779 and 69780). In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69777 through 69968), we finalized changes to Shared Savings Program policies, including to: provide advance shared savings payments in the form of advance investment payments to certain new, low revenue ACOs that can be used to support their participation in the Shared Savings Program; provide greater flexibility in the progression to performance-based risk; establish a health equity adjustment to an ACO's Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) quality performance category score used to determine shared savings and losses to recognize high quality performance by ACOs serving a higher proportion of underserved populations; incorporate a sliding scale reflecting an ACO's quality performance for use in determining shared savings for ACOs, and revise the approach for determining shared losses for ENHANCED track ACOs; modify the benchmarking methodology to strengthen financial incentives for long term participation by reducing the impact of ACOs' performance and market penetration on their benchmarks, and to support the business case for ACOs serving high risk and high dually eligible populations to participate, as well as mitigate bias in regional expenditure calculations for ACOs electing prospective assignment; expand opportunities for certain low revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track to share in savings; make changes to policies within other programmatic areas, including the program's beneficiary assignment methodology, requirements related to marketing material review and beneficiary notifications, the SNF 3-day rule waiver application, and data sharing requirements.

Policies applicable to Shared Savings Program ACOs for purposes of reporting for other programs have also continued to evolve based on changes in the statute. The Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA) (Pub. L. 114-10, April 16, 2015) established the Quality Payment Program. In the CY 2017 Quality Payment Program final rule with comment period (81 FR 77008), we established regulations for the MIPS and Advanced APMs and related policies applicable to eligible clinicians who participate in APMs, including the Shared Savings Program. We have also made updates to policies under the Quality Payment Program through the annual CY PFS rules.

c. Summary of Shared Savings Program Proposals

In sections III.G.2. through III.G.7. of this proposed rule, we propose modifications to the Shared Savings Program's policies, and describe comment solicitations. As a general summary, we are proposing the following changes to Shared Savings Program policies to:

• Revise the quality reporting and the quality performance requirements (section III.G.2. of this proposed rule), including the following:

++ Allow Shared Savings Program ACOs the option to report quality measures under the APP on only their Medicare beneficiaries through Medicare CQMs (section III.G.2.b. of this proposed rule).

++ Update the APP measure set for Shared Savings Program ACOs (section III.G.2.c. of this proposed rule).

++ Revise the calculation of the health equity adjustment underserved multiplier (section III.G.2.d. of this proposed rule).

++ Use historical data to establish the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard (section III.G.2.e. of this proposed rule).

++ Apply a Shared Savings Program scoring policy for suppressed APP measures (section III.G.2.f. of this proposed rule).

++ Require Spanish language administration of the CAHPS for MIPS survey (section III.G.2.g. of this proposed rule).

++ Align CEHRT requirements for Shared Savings Program ACOs with MIPS (section III.G.2.h. of this proposed rule).

++ Solicit comments on MIPS Value Pathway reporting for specialists in Shared Savings Program ACOs (section III.G.2.i. of this proposed rule).

++ Revise the requirement to meet the case minimum requirement for quality performance standard determinations (section III.G.2.j. of this proposed rule).

• Revise the policies for determining beneficiary assignment (section III.G.3 of this proposed rule).

++ Modify the step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology and approach to identifying the assignable beneficiary population (section III.G.3.a of this proposed rule).

++ Update the definition of primary care services used in beneficiary assignment at § 425.400(c) (section III.G.3.b of this proposed rule).

• Revise the policies on the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology (section III.G.4 of this proposed rule).

++ Modify the calculation of the regional update factor used to update the historical benchmark between benchmark year (BY) 3 and the performance year by capping an ACO's regional service area risk score growth through use of an adjustment factor to provide more equitable treatment for ACOs and for symmetry with the cap on ACO risk score growth (section III.G.4.b of this proposed rule).

++ Further mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustment on the benchmark to encourage participation by ACOs caring for medically complex, high-cost beneficiaries (section III.G.4.c of this proposed rule).

++ Specify the circumstances in which CMS would recalculate the prior savings adjustment for changes in values used in benchmark calculations due to compliance action taken to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, or as a result of the issuance of a revised initial determination of financial performance for a previous performance year (section III.G.4.d of this proposed rule).

++ Specify use of the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology applicable to the calendar year corresponding to the performance year in calculating prospective HCC risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for the performance year, and for each benchmark year of the ACO's agreement period (section III.G.4.e. of this proposed rule).

• Refine AIP policies, including the following (section III.G.5 of this proposed rule):

++ Modify AIP eligibility requirements to allow an ACO to elect to advance to a two-sided model level of the BASIC track's glide path beginning with the third performance year of the 5-year agreement period in which the ACO receives advance investment payments.

++ Modify AIP recoupment and recovery polices to forgo immediate collection of advance investment payments from an ACO that terminates its participation agreement early in order to early renew under a new participation agreement to continue their participation in the Shared Savings Program.

++ Modify termination policies to specify that CMS would immediately terminate advance investment payments to an ACO for future quarters if the ACO voluntarily terminates from the Shared Savings Program.

++ Modify ACO reporting requirements to require ACOs to submit spend plan updates to CMS in addition to publicly reporting spend plan updates.

++ Modify AIP requirements to permit ACOs to seek reconsideration review of all quarterly payment calculations.

• Update Shared Savings Program eligibility requirements, including the following (section III.G.6 of this proposed rule):

++ Remove the option for ACOs to request an exception to the shared governance requirement that 75 percent control of an ACO's governing body must be held by ACO participants.

++ Codify the existing Shared Savings Program operational approach to specify that CMS determines that an ACO participant TIN participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if it was included on a participant list used in financial reconciliation for a performance year under performance-based risk during the five most recent performance years.

• Make technical changes to references in Shared Savings Program regulations (section III.G.7 of this proposed rule), including to update assignment selection references to either § 425.226(a)(1) or § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) in subpart G of the regulations, correct typographical errors in the definitions in § 425.20, and update certain terminology used in § 425.702.

In addition, we are soliciting comment on potential future developments to Shared Savings Program policies (section III.G.8. of this proposed rule), including: incorporating a track with higher risk and potential reward than the ENHANCED track; modifying the amount of the prior savings adjustment through potential changes to the 50 percent scaling factor used in determining the adjustment, as well as considerations for potential modifications to the positive regional adjustment to reduce the possibility of inflating the benchmark; potential refinements to the ACPT and the three-way blended benchmark update factor over time to further mitigate potential ratchet effects within the update factor; and policies to promote ACO and CBO collaboration.

In combination, the Shared Savings Program proposals are anticipated to improve the incentive for ACOs to sustainably participate and earn shared savings in the program. On net, total program spending is estimated to decrease by $330 million over the 10-year period 2024 through 2033. These changes are anticipated to support the goals outlined in the CY 2023 PFS final rule for growing the program with a particular focus on including underserved beneficiaries.

Certain policies, including both existing policies and the proposed new policies described in this proposed rule, rely upon the authority granted in section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to use other payment models that the Secretary determines will improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare program, and that do not result in program expenditures greater than those that would result under the statutory payment model. The following proposals require the use of our authority under section 1899(i) of the Act: the proposed modifications to the calculation of regional component of the three-way blended update factor to cap regional service area risk score growth for symmetry with the ACO risk score growth cap, as described in section III.G.4.b of this proposed rule and the refinements to AIP policies as described in section III.G.5. of this proposed rule. Further, certain existing policies adopted under the authority of section 1899(i)(3) of the Act that depend on use of the assigned population and assignable beneficiary populations would be affected by the proposed addition of a new third step of the beneficiary assignment methodology and the proposed revisions to the definition of assignable beneficiary described in section III.G.3. of this proposed rule, including the following: the amount of advance investment payments; factors used in determining shared losses for ACOs under two-sided models (including calculation of the variable MSR/MLR based on the ACO's number of assigned beneficiaries, and the applicability of the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy for mitigating shared losses for two-sided model ACOs); and calculation of the ACPT, regional and national components of the three-way blended benchmark update factor. As described in the Regulatory Impact Analysis in section VII. and elsewhere in this proposed rule, these proposed changes to our payment methodology are expected to improve the quality and efficiency of care and are not expected to result in a situation in which the payment methodology under the Shared Savings Program, including all policies adopted under the authority of section 1899(i) of the Act, results in more spending under the program than would have resulted under the statutory payment methodology in section 1899(d) of the Act. We will continue to reexamine this projection in the future to ensure that the requirement under section 1899(i)(3)(B) of the Act that an alternative payment model not result in additional program expenditures continues to be satisfied. In the event that we later determine that the payment model that includes policies established under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act no longer meets this requirement, we would undertake additional notice and comment rulemaking to make adjustments to the payment model to assure continued compliance with the statutory requirements.

2. Quality Performance Standard and Other Reporting Requirements

a. Background

Section 1899(b)(3)(C) of the Act states that the Secretary shall establish quality performance standards to assess the quality of care furnished by ACOs and seek to improve the quality of care furnished by ACOs over time by specifying higher standards, new measures, or both for purposes of assessing such quality of care. As we stated in the November 2011 final rule establishing the Shared Savings Program (76 FR 67872), our principal goal in selecting quality measures for ACOs has been to identify measures of success in the delivery of high-quality health care at the individual and population levels. In the November 2011 final rule, we established a quality measure set spanning four domains: patient experience of care, care coordination/patient safety, preventative health, and at-risk population (76 FR 67872 through 67891). We have subsequently updated the measures that comprise the quality performance measure set for the Shared Savings Program through rulemaking in the CY 2015, 2016, 2017, 2019, and 2023 PFS final rules (79 FR 67907 through 67921, 80 FR 71263 through 71269, 81 FR 80484 through 80488, 83 FR 59707 through 59715, 87 FR 69860 through 69763, respectively).

b. Proposal for Shared Savings Program ACOs To Report Medicare CQMs

(1) Background

In the CY 2021 PFS final rule, CMS finalized modifications to the Shared Savings Program quality reporting requirements and quality performance standard for performance year 2021 and subsequent performance years (85 FR 84720). For performance year 2021 and subsequent years, ACOs are required to report quality data via the Alternative Payment Model (APM) Performance Pathway (APP). Pursuant to policies finalized under the CY 2022 and CY 2023 PFS (86 FR 65685; 87 FR 69858), to meet the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program through performance year 2024, ACOs must report the ten CMS Web Interface measures or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and the CAHPS for MIPS survey. In performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, ACOs must report the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and the CAHPS for MIPS survey.

Since the CY 2021 PFS final rule was issued, interested parties have continued to express concerns about requiring ACOs to report all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs via the APP due to the cost of purchasing and implementing a system wide infrastructure to aggregate data from multiple ACO participant TINs and varying EHR systems (86 FR 65257). In the CY 2022 PFS, commenters supported our acknowledgement of the complexity of the transition to all payer/all patient eCQM/MIPS CQMs (86 FR 65259). Additionally, one commenter questioned how data completeness standards could be met, given the issues of de-duplication and patients adding or moving insurance coverage (87 FR 65260). In public comment to the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, some commenters expressed multiple concerns regarding the requirement to report all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMS beginning in performance year 2025, such as issues related to meeting all payer data requirements, data completeness requirements, data aggregation and deduplication issues, and interoperability issues among different EHRs (87 FR 69837). In the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we explained these comments went beyond the scope of our proposals. These comment letters included details of the commenters' concerns. Specifically, some commenters, which included ACOs, noted the financial burden of aggregating, deduplicating, and exporting eCQM data across multiple TINs and EHRs. Commenters, including ACOs, expressed concerns that the requirement to report all payer measures ties performance to patients that the ACO does not actively manage, increases the difficulty of meeting data completeness, and may negatively impact an ACO's performance by including patients seen by specialists. We also acknowledged that as the transition to reporting all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs continues, the health equity adjustment which we finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69842) will support ACOs that may experience challenges with the new quality reporting requirement and will provide an incentive for ACOs to serve underserved populations during the transition to reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. In the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we stated that we are continuing to monitor the impact of these policies as we gain more experience with ACOs reporting all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and, further, that we are exploring how to address some of the concerns related to data aggregation and the all payer requirement and may revisit these and related issues in future rulemaking based on lessons learned (87 FR 69833).

Consistent with our goal to support ACOs in the transition to all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, in the CY 2023 final rule we extended the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive through PY 2024 to provide an incentive to ACOs to report the eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, while allowing them time to gauge their performance on the eCQMs/MIPS CQMs before full reporting of these measures is required beginning in performance year 2025 (87 FR 69835). Building on our goal to provide technical support to ACOs and to help ACOs build the skills necessary to aggregate and match patient data to report all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMS, in December 2022, we hosted a webinar to support ACOs in the transition to reporting all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and released a guidance document on the topic. Resources from the “Reporting MIPS CQMs and eCQMs in the APM Performance Pathway” webinar are available at https://qpp.cms.gov/resources/webinars. The guidance document, entitled “Medicare Shared Savings Program: Reporting MIPS CQMs and eCQMs in the Alternative Payment Model Performance Pathway (APP)” is available in the Quality Payment Program Resource Library at https://qpp-cm-prod-content.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/2179/APP%20Guidance%20Document%20for%20ACOs.pdf. We are committed to continuing to support ACOs in the transition to all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and in the transition to digital quality measurement reporting.

(2) Reporting the Medicare CQMs

In light of the concerns raised by ACOs and other interested parties and our commitment to supporting ACOs in the transition to digital quality measure reporting, for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years as determined by CMS, we are proposing in section IV.A.4.f.(1)(b) of this proposed rule to establish the Medicare CQMs for Accountable Care Organizations Participating in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Medicare CQMs) as a new collection type for Shared Savings Program ACOs reporting on the Medicare CQMs (reporting quality data on beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20) within the APP measure set and administering the CAHPS for MIPS Survey as required under the APP. Medicare CQMs would serve as a transition collection type to help some ACOs build the infrastructure, skills, knowledge, and expertise necessary to report all payer/all patient MIPS CQMs and eCQMs by defining a population of beneficiaries that exist within the all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications and tethering that population to claims encounters with ACO professionals with specialties used in assignment. Specifically, we believe that Medicare CQMs would address the concern raised by ACOs that—for ACOs with a higher proportion of specialty practices and/or multiple EHR systems—the broader all payer/all patient eligible population would capture beneficiaries with no primary care relationship to the ACO. Further, we believe that ACOs, particularly ACOs with a higher proportion of specialty practices and/or multiple EHRs, would be able utilize Medicare Part A and B claims data to help identify the ACO's eligible population and to validate the ACO's patient matching and deduplication efforts. For these reasons, we believe that it is appropriate to establish Medicare CQMs as a new collection type for Shared Savings Program ACOs only.

We recognize that Medicare CQMs might not be the suitable collection type for some ACOs, particularly ACOs with a single-EHR platform, a high proportion of primary care practices, and/or ACOs composed of participants with experience reporting all payer/all patient measures in traditional MIPS. We encourage ACOs to evaluate all quality reporting options to determine which collection type is most appropriate based on the ACO's unique composition and technical infrastructure. In addition to this proposal to report quality data utilizing the Medicare CQMs collection type, in performance year 2024, ACOs would have the option to report quality data utilizing the CMS Web Interface measures, eCQMs, and/or MIPS CQMs collection types. Under this proposal, in performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years as determined by CMS, ACOs would have the option to report quality data utilizing the eCQMs, MIPS CQMs, and/or Medicare CQMs collection types.

Our long-term goal continues to be to support ACOs in the adoption of all payer/all patient measures. We would monitor the reporting of quality data utilizing the Medicare CQMs collection type. For example, one indicator to evaluate Medicare CQMs would be to assess if there are any Medicare CQMs topped out as described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(iv). Therefore, in the 4th year the measure could be removed and would no longer be available for reporting during the performance period (83 FR 59761). Once the measure has reached an extremely topped out status (for example, a measure with an average mean performance within the 98th to 100th percentile range), we may propose the measure for removal in the next rulemaking cycle, regardless of whether or not it is in the midst of the topped out measure lifecycle, due to the extremely high and unvarying performance where meaningful distinctions and improvement in performance can no longer be made, after taking into account any other relevant factors (83 FR 59763). Separately, we may specify higher standards, new measures, or both—up to and including proposing to sunset the Medicare CQM collection type in future rulemaking—to ensure that Medicare CQMs conform to the intent of section 1899(b)(3)(C) of the Act and the priorities established in the CMS National Quality Strategy.

We also remain steadfast in our commitment to support providers in the transition from traditional MIPS to APMs and Advanced APMs. As mentioned above, we acknowledge that Medicare CQMs may not be the preferred collection type for all ACOs. ACOs that are composed of participants with experience reporting all payer/all patient measures in traditional MIPS would continue to have the option to report all payer/all patient measures under this proposal. In supporting providers in the transition from traditional MIPS to APMs and Advanced APMs we also recognize the corresponding need to support ACOs in the transition to all payer/all patient reporting. In addition to the technical support we would continue to provide ACOs, we believe that the Medicare CQM collection type would aid some ACOs in the transition to all payer/all patient measures by allowing ACOs to focus patient matching and data aggregation efforts on ACO professionals with specialties used in assignment while the ACO builds the infrastructure necessary to report on a broader eligible population.

To facilitate the reporting of Medicare CQMs, we are proposing to amend the definition of “Collection Type” in section IV.A.4.f.(1)(b) of this proposed rule to include the Medicare CQM as an available collection type in MIPS for ACOs that participate in the Shared Savings Program. We note that the Medicare CQMs collection type would serve as a transition collection type and be available as determined by CMS. Additionally, we are proposing to establish data submission and completeness criteria pertaining to the Medicare CQMs for the MIPS quality performance category as discussed in sections IV.A.4.f.(1)(c)(i) and IV.A.4.f.(1)(d)(ii) of this proposed rule.

A Medicare CQM for Accountable Care Organizations Participating in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Medicare CQM) is essentially a MIPS CQM reported by an ACO under the APP on only the ACO's Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries, instead of its all payer/all patient population. We are proposing to define a beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQM at § 425.20 as a beneficiary identified for purposes of reporting Medicare CQMs for ACOs participating in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Medicare CQMs) who is either of the following:

• A Medicare fee-for-service beneficiary (as defined at § 425.20) who—

++ Meets the criteria for a beneficiary to be assigned to an ACO described at § 425.401(a); and

++ Had at least one claim with a date of service during the measurement period from an ACO professional who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c), or who is a PA, NP, or CNS.

• A Medicare fee-for-service beneficiary who is assigned to an ACO in accordance with § 425.402(e) because the beneficiary designated an ACO professional participating in an ACO as responsible for coordinating their overall care.

While this definition refers to beneficiaries that have been assigned to an ACO, it nonetheless differs from our basic assignment methodology described under subpart E and from the concept of assignable beneficiary defined at § 425.20. Specifically, the use of the terms of “claim” (instead of primary care services) and “measurement period” (instead of assignment window) in the definition are synchronous with the application of all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications in reporting Medicare CQMs. For example, we define primary care services as the set of services identified by the HCPCS and revenue center codes designated under § 425.400(c). Each all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specification identifies eligible encounters that, in part, identify patients that should be included in the measure's eligible population.

Our proposed definition for beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs is intended to create alignment with the all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications. The HCPCS and revenue center codes designated under § 425.400(c) as primary care services for purposes of assignment under the Shared Savings Program only partially over-lap with the codes designated as eligible encounters used to identify the eligible population in all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications. Applying primary care service codes or deferring to the basic assignment methodology under subpart E to identify the beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs would have the unintended result of limiting the codes used to identify eligible encounters in the Medicare CQM Specification to only the codes that overlap with primary care services. Similarly, we define the assignment window as the 12-month period used to assign beneficiaries to the ACO. In a manner that is identical to the all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications, the Medicare CQM Specifications would identify the measurement period applicable to each measure. Applying the 12-month period used in assignment or deferring to the basic assignment methodology under Subpart E to identify the beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs would have the unintended result of reducing the beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs to only patients that had an eligible encounter during the overlap of the assignment window as defined at § 425.20 and the measurement period as defined in the Medicare CQM Specifications.

In section IV.A.4.f.(1)(d)(ii)of this proposed rule, we are proposing to establish the data completeness criteria threshold for the Medicare CQM collection type, in which a Shared Savings Program ACO that meets the reporting requirements under the APP would submit quality measure data for Medicare CQMs on the APM Entity's applicable beneficiaries eligible for the Medicare CQM, as proposed at § 425.20, who meet the measure's denominator criteria. In section IV.A.4.f.(1)(d)(ii) of this proposed rule, we are proposing the following data completeness criteria thresholds for Medicare CQMs:

• At least 75 percent for the CY 2024, CY 2025, and CY 2026 performance periods/2026, 2027, and 2028 MIPS payment years.

• At least 80 percent for the CY 2027 performance period/2029 MIPS payment year.

With the Medicare CQMs collection type serving as a transition collection type under the APP and would be available as determined by CMS, we are proposing to establish the aforementioned data completeness criteria thresholds in advance of the applicable performance periods. We recognize that it is advantageous to delineate the expectations for ACOs as they prepare to meet the quality reporting requirements for the Medicare CQMs collection type under the APP. We will assess the availability of the Medicare CQM as a collection type under the APP during the initial years of implementation and determine the timeframe to sunset the Medicare CQM as a collection type in future rulemaking.

An ACO that reports Medicare CQMs in an applicable performance year would aggregate patient data for beneficiaries who are eligible for Medicare CQMs, as proposed at § 425.20, across all ACO participants. The ACO would then match the aggregated patient data with each Medicare CQM Specification to identify the eligible population for each measure. The ACO's aggregated ACO submission must account for 100 percent of the eligible and matched patient population across all ACO participants. Data completeness is calculated based on submitted data. We believe that the proposal to establish the Medicare CQM collection type would address the concerns from ACOs regarding the capability of meeting the data completeness requirement for all payer data. Specifically, our proposal to define Beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs aims to focus ACOs' reporting efforts on beneficiaries with an encounter with an ACO professional with a specialty used in assignment and thereby reduce the potential for missing or un-matched patient data. It is important to note that ACOs that include or are composed solely of FQHCs or RHCs must report quality data on behalf of the FQHCs or RHCs that participate in the ACO. To clarify, while FQHCs and RHCs that provide services that are billed exclusively under FQHC or RHC payment methodologies are exempt from reporting traditional MIPS, FQHCs and RHCs that participate in APMs, such as the Shared Savings Program, are considered APM Entity groups described at § 414.1370.

To facilitate population-based activities related to improving health through quality measurement of Medicare CQMs and to aid ACOs in the process of patient matching and data aggregation necessary to report Medicare CQMs, we would provide ACOs a list of beneficiaries who are eligible for Medicare CQMs within the ACO. As set forth in our regulations at § 425.702, we share certain aggregate reports with ACOs under specific conditions, and this information includes demographic data that represents the minimum data necessary for ACOs to conduct health care operations work, which includes demographic and diagnostic information necessary to report quality data. We anticipate the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs to be shared once annually, at the beginning of the quality data submission period. Since we would not have full run-out on performance year claims data prior to the start of the quality data submission period, the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs would not be a complete list of beneficiaries that should be included on an ACO's Medicare CQMs reporting. ACOs would have to ensure that all beneficiaries that meet the applicable Medicare CQM Specification and also meet the definition of a beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs proposed under § 425.20 are included in the ACO's eligible population/denominator for reporting each Medicare CQM. We are proposing to add new paragraph (c)(1)(iii) to § 425.702 as follows:

For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, at the beginning of the quality submission period, CMS, upon the ACO's request for the data for purposes of population-based activities relating to improving health or reducing growth in health care costs, protocol development, case management, and care coordination, provides the ACO with information about its fee-for-service population.

• The following information is made available to ACOs regarding beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20:

++ Beneficiary name.

++ Date of birth.

++ Beneficiary identifier.

++ Sex.

• Information in the following categories, which represents the minimum data necessary for ACOs to conduct health care operations work, is made available to ACOs regarding beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20:

++ Demographic data such as enrollment status.

++ Health status information such as risk profile and chronic condition subgroup.

++ Utilization rates of Medicare services such as the use of evaluation and management, hospital, emergency, and post-acute services, including the dates and place of service.

The list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs shared by CMS would aim to help ACOs aggregate, and match and deduplicate patient data. We anticipate including the minimum data necessary to facilitate the reporting of Medicare CQMs including beneficiary identifier, gender, date of birth and death (if applicable), chronic condition subgroup, and the NPIs of the top three frequented providers in the ACO. We propose to include health status information such as risk profile and chronic condition subgroup to the extent that such data would aid ACOs in identifying patients that meet the denominator criteria for the Medicare CQM Specifications. We would also provide technical assistance to ACOs when reporting the Medicare CQMs, including providing technical resource documents. Our proposal to create Medicare CQMs is intended to support ACOs through the transition to reporting the all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and to facilitate quality assessment improvement activities (as described in the definition of health care operations at 45 CFR 164.501) since we would provide ACOs with a list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQM reporting to aid in patient matching and data deduplication.

In the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84733), we finalized the following 3 all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs under the APP for performance year 2021 and subsequent performance years:

• Quality ID#: 001 Diabetes: Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) Poor Control;

• Quality ID#: 134 Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-Up Plan; and

• Quality ID#: 236 Controlling High Blood Pressure.

In section IV.A.4. e. of this proposed rule, we are proposing to add these measures as Medicare CQMs to the APP measure set for Shared Savings Program ACOs beginning with performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. ACOs may report the 3 Medicare CQMs, or a combination of eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, to meet the Shared Savings Program quality reporting requirement at § 425.510(b) and the quality performance standard at § 425.512(a)(5).

As a result, in order to meet the Shared Savings Program reporting requirements:

• For performance year 2024, an ACO would be required to report the 10 measures under the CMS web interface measures, or the 3 eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs. In addition, an ACO would be required to administer the CAHPS for MIPS Survey, and CMS will calculate the two claims-based measures.

• For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, an ACO would be required to report the 3 eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs. In addition, an ACO would be required to administer the CAHPS for MIPS Survey, and CMS will calculate the two claims-based measures.

ACOs may still report via the APP using the all payer/all patient eCQM/MIPS CQM collection types and may report different collection types for each measure.

In conjunction with the proposed changes to § 425.512(a)(2), as described in section III.G.2.j. of this proposed rule, we propose to incorporate Medicare CQMs into the existing quality performance standard policies for new ACOs at § 425.512(a)(2)(i), (ii), and (iii). Accordingly, we propose that for the first performance year of an ACO's first agreement period under the Shared Savings Program, if the ACO reports data via the APP and meets MIPS data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1), the ACO will meet the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program, if:

• For performance year 2024. The ACO reports the 10 CMS Web Interface measures or the 3 eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, and administers a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP.

• For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years. The ACO reports the 3 eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and administers a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP.

Additionally, we propose to incorporate Medicare CQMs into the existing policies at § 425.512(a)(5)(iii) for when an ACO would not meet the quality performance standard or the alternative quality performance standard. Accordingly, we propose that an ACO would not meet the quality performance standard or the alternative quality performance standard if:

• For performance year 2024, if an ACO (1) does not report any of the 10 CMS Web Interface measures or any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and (2) does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP.

• For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, if an ACO (1) does not report any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and (2) does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP.

We are not proposing to add Medicare CQMs to the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive described at § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ) for performance year 2024. The eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive intends to provide an incentive to ACOs to report the all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs while allowing them time to gauge their performance on the all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs before full reporting of these measures is required beginning in performance year 2025.

Under the goals of the CMS National Quality Strategy, CMS is moving towards a building-block approach to streamline quality measure across CMS quality programs for the adult and pediatric populations. This “Universal Foundation” of quality measure will focus provider attention, reduce burden, identify disparities in care, prioritize development of interoperable, digital quality measures, allow for cross-comparisons across programs, and help identify measurement gaps. Following in the proposals under MIPS, we intend to propose future policies aligning the APP measure set for Sharing Savings Program ACOs with the quality measures under the “Universal Foundation” beginning in performance year 2025. These Universal Foundation measures are proposed to be adopted into the existing the Value in Primary Care MVP as discussed in Table B.11 of Appendix 3: MVP Inventory to this proposed rule. By creating alignment with the Universal Foundation in the Value in Primary Care MVP and the APP measure set by 2025, primary care clinicians would develop familiarity with the same quality measures that are reported in the APP while in MIPS. We expect this alignment would reduce the barriers to participation in the Shared Savings Program.

(3) Benchmarking Policy for Medicare CQMs

As the Shared Savings Program adopted the APP (see, for example, § 425.512(a)(3)(i)), benchmarks for quality measures used by the program are those established under the MIPS policies at § 414.1380(b)(1)(ii). We propose that new benchmarks for scoring ACOs on the Medicare CQMs under MIPS would be developed in alignment with MIPS benchmarking policies. As historical Medicare CQM data would not be available at the time this proposal is finalized (if this proposal is finalized), we propose for performance year 2024 and 2025 to score Medicare CQMs using performance period benchmarks. Similarly, as quality performance data are submitted via Medicare CQM and baseline period data become available to establish historical benchmarks, we propose for performance year 2026 and for subsequent performance years to transition to using historical benchmarks for Medicare CQMs when baseline period data are available to establish historical benchmarks in a manner that is consistent with the MIPS benchmarking policies at § 414.1380(b)(1)(ii).

(4) Expanding the Health Equity Adjustment to Medicare CQMs

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69838 through 69858), for performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years, we finalized a health equity adjustment to upwardly adjust the MIPS Quality performance score for ACOs that report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, are high performing on quality, and serve a higher proportion of underserved beneficiaries. As we stated in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, the goals of the health equity adjustment include rewarding ACOs serving a high proportion of underserved beneficiaries and supporting ACOs with the transition to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs (87 FR 69841).

Consistent with the goal of supporting ACOs in their transition to all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, we are proposing that ACOs that report Medicare CQMs would be eligible for the health equity adjustment to their quality performance category score when calculating shared savings payments. We are proposing to revise § 425.512(b) to specify that, for performance years 2024 and subsequent performance years, we would calculate a health equity adjusted quality performance score for an ACO that reports the three Medicare CQMs or a combination of eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for each measure, and administers the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B)). This proposal would advance equity within the Shared Savings Program by supporting ACOs that deliver high quality care and serve a high proportion of underserved individuals. Applying the health equity adjustment to an ACO's quality performance category score when reporting Medicare CQMs would encourage ACOs to treat underserved populations.

(5) Summary of Proposals

In Table 25 of this proposed rule we summarize the proposed changes to the regulation at § 425.512(a)(4) and (5) to reflect the proposed changes to the quality reporting requirements and quality performance standard for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. Performance benchmarks for performance year 2024 used to determine the 10th, 30th, and 40th percentiles for purposes of evaluating the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive described at § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ) will be posted on the Quality Payment Program Resource Library website at https://qpp.cms.gov/resources/resource-library . We direct readers to the MIPS measure benchmarking policies described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(ii) and to both the quality benchmark and performance period benchmark documentation posted on the Quality Payment Program Resource Library website at https://qpp.cms.gov/resources/resource-library for more details. Performance benchmarks differ by collection type (that is, eCQM, MIPS CQM, Medicare CQM (as proposed), CMS Web Interface) and are updated for each performance year.

c. Proposed APP Measure Set

(1) Background

We refer readers to Table 26, which lists the measures included in the final APP measure set that will be reported by Shared Savings Program ACOs for performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years. These are the same measures finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69862); however, we note that the Collection Type for each measure has been updated. As finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69863), we included the measure type in Table 26 for each measure in the measure set to provide ACOs a list of the outcome measures for purposes of meeting the quality performance incentive for reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. This information is also relevant to the alternative quality performance standard under which ACOs that fail to meet the quality performance standard to qualify for the maximum sharing rate, but that achieve a quality performance score at the 10th percentile on 1 of the 4 outcome measures in the APP measure set, may be eligible to share in savings on a sliding scale (87 FR 69861). We noted inclusion of this information does not change any of the measures in the measure set.

(2) Proposed Revisions

Table 27 includes the proposed eCQM/MIPS CQM measure set for performance year 2024 for the Shared Savings Program and outlines the measure types, which is relevant for ACOs that may elect to report on eCQM/ MIPS CQMs in order to qualify for the incentive under § 425.512(a)(4)(i)(B).

Table 28 identifies the preliminary measures for the Universal Foundation's adult component.

The CMS Web Interface collection type under the APP includes 10 measures. We refer readers to Table Group E of Appendix 1 of this proposed rule for the proposed substantive changes to measure specifications for 9 out of 10 CMS Web Interface measures starting with performance year 2024. As proposed, the changes would update measures and align the CMS Web Interface measures with the practice workflows of the MIPS CQM collection type.

d. Proposals To Modify the Health Equity Adjustment Underserved Multiplier

(1) Background

Consistent with our goal of rewarding ACOs that include a higher proportion of underserved beneficiaries while delivering high quality care, we finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69836 through 69857) the application of a health equity adjustment that adds up to 10 bonus points to an ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score based on certain criteria. The health equity adjustment is applied to an ACO's MIPS quality performance category score when the ACO reports the three all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in performance year 2023 and, as proposed in section III.G.2.b.(2) of this proposed rule, the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs starting in performance year 2024. To qualify for the health equity adjustment, the ACO must also meet the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 and administer the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B)). The health equity adjustment is conditional on (1) high quality measure performance and (2) providing care for a proportion of underserved populations greater than or equal to a predetermined floor.

The goal of the health equity adjustment is to reward ACOs with high performance scores on quality measures and that serve a high proportion of underserved beneficiaries. Correspondingly, the health equity adjustment bonus points are calculated by multiplying the ACO's performance scaler by the ACO's underserved multiplier. An ACO's performance scaler is designed to identify top performance among ACOs reporting all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in performance year 2023 and, as proposed in section III.G.2.b.(2) of this proposed rule, eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs in performance year 2024. The performance scaler is an aggregated value across all eCQM/MIPS CQM measures and is determined based on if the ACO's measure performance was in the top, middle, or bottom third of ACO performance for that performance year. We refer readers to section III.G.4.b.(7).c of the CY 2023 PFS final (87 FR 69843 through 69845) for more details on the performance scaler calculation. The underserved multiplier is designed to identify ACOs serving high proportions of underserved beneficiaries. As described in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69845 through 69849), the underserved multiplier is a proportion ranging from zero to one of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for the performance year that is considered underserved based on the highest of: (1) the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an Area Deprivation Index (ADI) national percentile rank of at least 85; or (2) the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries who are enrolled in Medicare Part D low-income subsidy (LIS) or are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. The use of both the ADI and Medicare and Medicaid dual eligibility or LIS status to assess underserved populations in the health equity adjustment allows CMS to consider both broader neighborhood level characteristics and individual characteristics among CMS beneficiaries.

The CY 2023 PFS final rule did not state how CMS intended to compute the proportion of beneficiaries with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85 with respect to beneficiaries for whom a numeric national percentile rank value is not available. We do not believe it is appropriate to assign a zero to the beneficiaries without an ADI national percentile rank in the calculation. Doing so would unfairly disadvantage ACOs with such beneficiaries vis-à-vis those ACOs with beneficiaries that all have an ADI national percentile rank by lowering their scores. The CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69846) stated that the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85 is computed using the number of assigned beneficiaries. A footnote stated that in computing the proportion of beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, we would use for each beneficiary the fraction of the year (referred to as person years) in which they were eligible for the aged/dual eligible enrollment type or for which they were eligible for the ESRD or disabled enrollment type and dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. In response to public comment, we finalized the proposal to include LIS as a modification to the calculation of the underserved multiplier (87 FR 69849). In calculating the LIS proportion, CMS uses the same methodology it adopted for calculating dually eligible beneficiaries: person years.

(2) Proposed Revisions

We propose to revise the underserved multiplier calculation to specify the calculations in more detail and bring greater consistency between the calculation of the proportion of ACOs' assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85 and the proportion of ACOs' assigned beneficiaries who are enrolled in Medicare Part D LIS or are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. Specifically, we propose to remove beneficiaries who do not have a numeric national percentile rank available for ADI from the health equity adjustment calculation for performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years. Beneficiaries without a national percentile ADI rank would appear neither in the numerator nor in the denominator of the proportion.

While we established a policy for the treatment of aligned beneficiaries for whom an ADI national percentile rank could not reasonably be calculated for use in the advance investment payments risk factors-based score (87 FR 69796 through 69797), we neither proposed nor finalized a policy for such beneficiaries with respect to the calculation of the health equity adjustment underserved multiplier—nor do we believe the policy we finalized for AIP is appropriate for calculating the health equity adjustment. In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69800), we finalized the use of imputing a value of 50 for the ADI national percentile rank if there is insufficient data to match a beneficiary to an ADI national percentile rank for calculating AIP risk factors-based scores. There are important differences in the implications of using an imputed value of 50 for calculating the AIP risk factors-based scores and for calculating the underserved multiplier. The imputed ADI ranking of 50 corresponds to the average national ADI ranking and would be the most neutral imputed value and would avoid biasing an ACO's payments in either direction for risk factor-based scores in the AIP calculation. The use of an ADI ranking of 50 in the underserved multiplier, however, would result in that beneficiary not counting in the numerator of the underserved multiplier proportion because only beneficiaries with an ADI of at least 85 are counted in the numerator. Therefore, we are proposing to exclude beneficiaries without a national percentile ADI rank from the health equity adjustment underserved multiplier. This approach is more equitable because it will remove a beneficiary without an ADI rank from the denominator and the numerator of the calculation of an ACO's underserved multiplier instead of penalizing ACOs that have such beneficiaries.

It is in the public interest to apply this change starting with performance period 2023. Section 1871(e)(1)(A)(ii) of the Act authorizes the Secretary to retroactively apply a substantive change in Medicare regulations if the Secretary determines that failure to apply the change retroactively would be contrary to the public interest. Here, applying this change starting with performance period 2023 is in the public interest because, absent further specification of how to treat beneficiaries without a national percentile ADI rank current policy may unfairly penalize ACOs for reasons beyond their control. Current policy counts beneficiaries with missing ADI ranks in the underserved multiplier denominator and contributes zero to the numerator, thereby reducing the health equity adjustment for ACOs with such beneficiaries and harming their ability to meet the quality performance standard and receive shared savings.

Separately, we propose to modify the calculation of the proportion of assigned beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid and the calculation of the proportion of assigned beneficiaries enrolled in LIS to use the number of beneficiaries rather than person years for calculating the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries who are enrolled in LIS or who are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid starting in performance year 2024. For example, when calculating the underserved multiplier component of the health equity adjustment to an ACO's quality performance score for ACOs that report the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, the proportion would be equal to the number of assigned beneficiaries with any months enrolled in LIS or dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid divided by total number of assigned beneficiaries. We are not proposing to alter the calculation of the proportion of beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85, which is already based on the number of assigned beneficiaries. Person years would continue to be used in financial calculations where beneficiary experience is stratified into by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, and aged non/dual eligible) and it is important to account for partial year enrollment to ensure accuracy. The proposed policy change would bring greater consistency between the two proportions used in determining the underserved multiplier. It also acknowledges that beneficiaries with partial year as compared to full year LIS enrollment or dual eligibility are also socioeconomically vulnerable and strengthens incentives for ACOs to serve this population. Further, inclusion of beneficiaries with partial year LIS enrollment in the underserved multiplier provides increased incentive for ACOs to help facilitate LIS enrollment for beneficiaries who meet eligibility criteria.

We seek comment on these proposals.

e. Proposal To Use Historical Data To Establish the 40th Percentile MIPS Quality Performance Category Score

(1) Background

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69858), we finalized that beginning performance year 2024, one of the ways for an ACO to meet the Shared Savings Program quality performance standard and share in savings at the maximum rate under its track (or payment model within a track) is for the ACO to achieve a health equity adjusted quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility based-scoring.

In the CY 2022 PFS proposed and final rules (86 FR 39274 and 86 FR 65271), we stated that, for a given performance year, the 30th or 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores would be calculated after MIPS final scoring is complete based on the distribution across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring. Therefore, we are not able to provide performance rate information prior to or during the performance year. Nevertheless, we stated that we believe that publicly displaying prior year performance scores that equate to the 30th and 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores for the applicable performance year would still provide helpful information for ACOs to determine what level of quality performance they would need to meet in order to satisfy the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program. We stated that we would release this historical information on the Shared Savings Program website when it becomes available.

In the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39274), we also explained that interested parties have expressed concerns regarding the lack of information on the level of quality performance that would equate to the 30th or 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score and that would enable an ACO to be eligible to share in savings or to avoid maximum shared losses, if applicable. We noted that interested parties have expressed concern that these data are not publicly available prior to the start of a performance year and that they do not believe that ACOs have a way of determining what quality score they would need to achieve to meet the quality performance standard.

In the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39274), we also solicited comment on whether publicly displaying prior year performance scores that equate to the 30th or 40th MIPS Quality performance category scores would help to address ACOs' concerns regarding the lack of advance information regarding the quality performance score they must meet in order to satisfy the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program. Several commenters supported publicly displaying prior year performance scores that equate to the 30th or 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality category performance scores, and one commenter expressed concern that publicly displaying prior year performance scores is not the optimal way to address concerns of interested parties and indicated that performance is volatile and the 30th (or 40th) percentile may change significantly from year to year depending upon changes in quality performance in MIPS (86 FR 65271).

We clarified in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46148) and final rule (87 FR 69867) that we use the submission-level MIPS Quality performance category scores (unweighted distribution of scores) to determine the 30th percentile and 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores for purposes of establishing the applicable quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program. In light of public comments and concerns about the predictability of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score due to changes in MIPS scoring policies over time—including MIPS scoring changes impacting measures that lack a benchmark or case minimum as described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(i)(A), measure achievement points as described at paragraph (b)(1)(i), new measures (years 1 and 2 of a measure's use) as described at paragraph (b)(1)(i)(C), new sub-group reporting option as described at § 414.1318(a), and MIPS High Priority and End to End Bonus Points as described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(v)—and as a result of the concerns expressed by ACOs and other interested parties and as we gain experience with aligning Shared Savings Program reporting and scoring policies with MIPS, we believe that a revised methodology is needed to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score for the quality performance standard for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years.

As MIPS scoring policies evolve over time, changes in MIPS scoring policy have the potential to adjust the year-to-year comparability of MIPS Quality performance category scores. Between performance years 2022 and 2023, there were MIPS policy changes to measures that lack a benchmark or case minimum as described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(i)(A), measure achievement points as described at paragraph (b)(1)(i), new measures (years 1 and 2 of a measure's use) as described at paragraph (b)(1)(i)(C), and a new sub-group reporting option as described at § 414.1318(a). Additionally, MIPS High Priority and End to End Bonus Points were sunset in performance year 2022 as described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(v). The projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score for performance year 2023 does not reflect these proposed methodological changes. To minimize reliance on a single year of performance data, the use of multiple years of historical data could be used to “smooth” out the impact of MIPS scoring policy changes on the quality performance standard in any one year. At the same time, using too many years of data to average scores might include a greater number of years that don't reflect current policies.

(2) Proposed Revisions

For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, we propose to use historical submission-level MIPS Quality performance category scores to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score. Specifically, we propose to use a rolling 3-performance year average with a lag of 1 performance year (for example, the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2024 would be based on averaging the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores from performance years 2020 through 2022). We believe that our proposal to use a 3-year historical average is consistent with the proposal under section IV.A.4.h.(2) of this proposed rule that would permit, for purposes of establishing a performance threshold as identified in § 414.1405(b), a time span of up to three consecutive performance periods for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years.

We would provide ACOs with the performance score that equates to the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score that would be used as the quality performance standard for a given performance year prior to the start of the performance year (for example, the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score based on historical data and applicable for performance year 2024 would be released on the Shared Savings Program website in December 2023).

The use of 3 historical base years would mitigate issues that may arise from using a single year historical reference such as scoring, policy, and/or performance anomalies, such as a pandemic, specific to the historical base year. Additionally, the use of historical data would allow additional time for data availability and limit the potential impact of MIPS Targeted Review as described at § 414.1385 and other MIPS scoring corrections. This approach is also responsive to the concerns ACOs, and other interested parties have with the predictability of the current method of calculating the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score. However, we acknowledge that by using historical benchmarks, the benchmark would not reflect the most recent policies, measure specifications, and scores. For example, the historical base years are 2-4 years removed from the performance year and could reflect data that may have anomalies specific to the base year that would render those data inconsistent with the performance year's quality performance. Additionally, changes to measure specifications for measures included in the APP measure set may result in the historical base period including measures that are different than the corresponding measures that were applicable during the performance year. This could further reduce the comparability of historic base year data with the performance year's quality performance data.

Table 29 shows the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores for performance years 2018 through 2021 based on the current methodology as published in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69868). The proposed methodology would be effective for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. We have added to Table 29 the projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores for performance years 2022 and 2023 based on the proposed methodology for illustrative purposes. The projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2022 is based on the average of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores from performance years 2018 through 2020, and the projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2023 is based on the average of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores from performance years 2019 through 2021. The years are averaged at equal weights. For example, we would calculate the projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2022 by first summing the 2018 (70.80), 2019 (70.82), and 2020 (75.59) 40th percentile Quality performance category score values to arrive at a value of 217.21 [70.80 + 70.82 + 75.59 = 217.21]. We would then divide the value of 217.21 by three (the number of years included in the historical reference period) to arrive at a projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score of 72.40 for 2022 [217.21 ÷ 3 = 72.40]. Note that this example illustrates averaging the 2018, 2019, and 2020 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score values.

We seek comment on our proposal to use a 3-performance year rolling average with a lag of 1-performance year to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. Using a 1-year lag would help ensure the availability of base period data by limiting the possibility that data availability is negatively impacted by scoring, policy, and/or performance anomalies from the prior performance year. In the development of our proposal to use a 3-performance year rolling average with a lag of 1-performance year to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, we considered another alternative methodology, which was to establish a historical quality performance standard based on the year immediately prior to the performance year's quality performance score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring. We also seek comment on other alternative methodologies we should consider to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score for the quality performance standard.

f. Proposal To Apply a Shared Savings Program Scoring Policy for Excluded APP Measures

(1) Background

In the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84720 through 84734), we finalized an approach that aligns the Shared Savings Program quality performance scoring methodology with the MIPS scoring methodology. We also stated that for each quality measure that an ACO submits that has significant changes, the total available measure achievement points are reduced by 10 points under the APP under current MIPS scoring policy (§ 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A)) (85 FR 84725)). In the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84901), we finalized policies at § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A) to provide that for each measure under MIPS that is submitted, if applicable, and impacted by significant changes, performance is based on data for 9 consecutive months of the applicable CY performance period. If such data are not available or may result in patient harm or misleading results, the measure is excluded from a MIPS eligible clinician's total measure achievement points and total available measure achievement points. We stated that “significant changes” means changes to a measure that are outside the control of the clinician and its agents and may result in patient harm or misleading results. Significant changes include, but are not limited to, changes to codes (such as ICD-10, CPT, or HCPCS codes), clinical guidelines, or measure specifications. As described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A), measures that are excluded due to significant changes are excluded from a MIPS eligible clinician's total measure achievement points and total available measure achievement points.

In performance year 2022, two of the eCQMs/MIPS CQMs that are part of the APP measure set were excluded from MIPS measure achievement points and total available measure achievement points for the MIPS Quality performance category under § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A). Specifically, the eCQM version of the Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-up Plan measure (Quality ID #134) and the Controlling High Blood Pressure measure (Quality ID #236) were excluded. Thus, under MIPS scoring policies, ACOs reporting one or both of these measures had their total measure achievement points and total available measure achievement points reduced by 10 (for reporting one measure) or 20 (for reporting both measures) points, respectively. Under the APP, these ACOs were still required to report all 6 measures; however, their performance year 2022 MIPS Quality performance category score was based on the 4 or 5 non-excluded measures (depending on whether the ACO reported one or both excluded measures) in the APP measure set. Consequently, the resulting MIPS Quality performance category score for an ACO that would have performed well on the excluded quality measures would be lower than it otherwise would have been if those measures were not excluded. Alternatively, if an ACO would have performed poorly on the excluded quality measures, then the resulting MIPS Quality performance category score would be higher than it otherwise would have been if those measures were not excluded. In either scenario, an ACO is required to report quality performance for all measures under the APP and has no control over whether and which measures are excluded.

(2) Proposed Revisions

Given that the Shared Savings Program does not determine which quality measures are excluded and that ACOs do not have a choice of measures they can report under the APP, we do not want to adversely impact shared savings determinations for events outside the ACOs' control, such as in the event a measure is excluded. Therefore, we are proposing that, for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, if (1) an ACO reports all required measures under the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for all required measures and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1), and (2) the ACO's total available measure achievement points used to calculate the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score for the performance year is reduced due to measure exclusion under § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A), then we would use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, to determine whether the ACO meets the quality performance standard required to share in savings at the maximum rate under its track (or payment model within a track), for the relevant performance year. This policy aims to alleviate the potential adverse impacts to shared savings determinations that may arise in the event that one or more of the quality measures required under the APP is excluded. We are also proposing to make conforming changes to the regulation text § 425.512 by revising paragraph (a)(5)(i) and adding paragraph (a)(7).

We finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69845) that unscored measures are removed from the calculation of an ACO's health equity adjustment, effectively receiving a performance scaler of 0 for those measures. However, we inadvertently did not codify this policy in the Code of Federal Regulations. Therefore, in this proposed rule, we are proposing to codify this policy by revising § 425.512(b)(3)(ii)(B) to state that CMS assigns a value of 0 for each measure that CMS does not evaluate because the measure is unscored. We propose that the regulation text changes would be effective for performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years as the policy was finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule to calculate the health equity adjustment for performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years.

We are also proposing that quality measures impacted by the MIPS policy at § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A) are unscored measures for the purposes of calculating the health equity adjustment; therefore, excluded measures would not render an ACO ineligible for the health equity adjustment as long as the ACO reports all required measures under the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for all required measures and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1).

As discussed in section IV.A.4.g.(1)(c)(i) of this proposed rule, we are proposing a change to the MIPS policy to remove the 10 percent threshold for changes to codes, clinical guidelines, or measure specifications for all measure types. We believe that our proposal to apply a floor to an ACO's Quality performance category score in determining the ACO's quality performance standard in the event that the ACO's total available measure achievement points used to calculate the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score for the performance year is reduced under § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A) functions in concert with our proposal under section IV.A.4.g.(1)(c)(i) of this proposed rule. We refer readers to section IV.A.4.g.(1)(c)(i) of this proposed rule for further discussion of our proposal to change the MIPS scoring policy.

g. Proposal To Require Spanish Language Administration of the CAHPS for MIPS Survey

(1) Background

CMS has created official translations of the CAHPS for MIPS survey in 7 languages, including Spanish, Cantonese, Korean, Mandarin, Portuguese, Russian, and Vietnamese (81 FR 77386), in addition to the required administration of English survey. However, use of these translations is mostly voluntary, with the exception of a requirement to administer the Spanish translation of the CAHPS for MIPS Survey for patients residing in Puerto Rico. Organizations (groups, virtual groups, subgroups, and APM entities) that elect CAHPS for MIPS must contract with a CMS-approved survey vendor to administer the survey and must request survey translations for the vendor to administer the survey in an optional language. Generally, the use of survey translations adds additional survey administration cost to the organization.

(2) Proposed Revisions

As discussed in section IV.A.4.f.(1)(c)(ii) of this proposed rule, we are proposing to require Spanish language administration of the CAHPS for MIPS survey for MIPS eligible clinicians reporting MIPS. Specifically, we are proposing to require MIPS eligible clinicians to contract with a CMS-approved survey vendor that, in addition to administering the survey in English, will administer the Spanish survey translation to Spanish-preferring patients using the procedures detailed in the CAHPS for MIPS Quality Assurance Guidelines beginning with 2024 survey administration. This should better ensure that we are assessing the experience of patients who are Spanish-speaking and with limited English proficiency, and is part of our efforts to advance health equity. We refer readers to section IV.A.4.f.(1)(c)(ii) of this proposed rule for further discussion of our proposal related to the CAHPS for MIPS survey. In addition, we are interested in gathering information directly from organizations that administer the CAHPS for MIPS Survey on whether they consider to request the vendor to administer the survey in one or more of the available survey translations based on the language preferences of patients. We are also interested in learning about the factors that more or less likely affect the administration of survey translations where there is need for one or more of the available translations.

h. Proposals To Align CEHRT Requirements for Shared Savings Program ACOs With MIPS

(1) Background

Many of our programs require the use of certified electronic health record (EHR) technology (CEHRT), including the Quality Payment Program, Shared Savings Program, and other value-based payment initiatives. With respect to the Shared Savings Program, section 1899(b)(2)(G) of the Act requires participating ACOs to define processes to report on quality measures and coordinate care, such as through the use of telehealth, remote patient monitoring, and other such enabling technologies. In addition, section 1899(b)(3)(D) of the Act authorizes the Secretary to incorporate reporting requirements and incentive payments from section 1848 of the Act into the Shared Savings Program, such as requirements and payments related to electronic prescribing and electronic health records, including using alternative criteria for determining whether to make such incentive payments. Pursuant to these authorities, we have incorporated reporting requirements related to the adoption and use of CEHRT in our regulations, including specifically cross-referencing the Quality Payment Program's definition of CEHRT (42 CFR 414.1305) in our regulatory definition of CEHRT at § 425.20. For the Shared Savings Program and Quality Payment Program, CEHRT currently is defined at § 414.1305 as EHR technology (which could include multiple technologies) certified by the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) under the ONC Health IT Certification Program as meeting the 2015 Edition Base EHR definition, set forth at 45 CFR 170.102, and a designated set of the 2015 Edition health information technology (IT) certification criteria as further provided therein.

The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH Act), sections 13001 through 13424 of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) (Pub. L. 111-5, February 17, 2009), established ONC under the Department of Health and Human Services, authorizing ONC to adopt standards for certifying health IT. ONC has codified its standards, implementation specifications, certification criteria, and certification program for health IT under 45 CFR part 170. Specifically, ONC has codified its certification criteria for health IT, including EHRs, at 45 CFR 170.315. Currently referred to as the “2015 Edition health IT certification criteria.” For more information regarding ONC's current policies, standards, and certification requirements for health IT, please refer to 45 CFR part 170, particularly § 170.315, and the ONC Certification of Health IT website at: https://www.healthit.gov/topic/certification-ehrs/certification-health-it .

In the CY 2019 PFS final rule (83 FR 59982 through 59988), we adopted three key requirements related to ACOs use of CEHRT, beginning with the performance years starting on January 1, 2019.

First, ACOs must certify annually, at the end of each performance year, that the percentage of eligible clinicians participating in the ACO who use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers meets or exceeds the applicable percentage during the current performance year. The ACO's eligible clinicians must use CEHRT that meets the definition in our regulation at § 425.20, which provides that CEHRT has the same meaning as under the Quality Payment Program at § 414.1305. Specifically, we updated our regulations at § 425.506(f) to reflect that, beginning with the performance years starting on January 1, 2019:

• ACOs in a track that does not meet the financial risk standard to be an Advanced APM, which includes ACOs participating under BASIC track Levels A through D, must certify annually that at least 50 percent of the eligible clinicians participating in the ACO use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers.

• ACOs in a track that meets the financial risk standard to be an Advanced APM, which includes ACOs participating under BASIC track Level E or the ENCHANCED track, must certify annually that the percentage of eligible clinicians participating in the ACO that use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers meets or exceeds the threshold established under the Quality Payment Program at § 414.1415(a)(1)(i). Under this requirement, for Performance Periods beginning in 2019, 75 percent of eligible clinicians must use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or health care providers.

Second, we also revised the Shared Savings Program requirements for data submission and certifications at § 425.302(a)(3)(iii) to require the ACO to certify at the end of each performance year, that the percentage of eligible clinicians participating in the ACO that use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers meets or exceeds the applicable percentage specified by CMS at § 425.506(f).

Finally, we updated our regulations at § 425.20 to incorporate the definition of CEHRT at § 414.1305 that applies under the Quality Payment Program. The Quality Payment Program's regulation at § 414.1305 defines CEHRT as EHR technology (which could include multiple technologies) certified under the ONC Health IT Certification Program that meets the 2015 Edition Base EHR definition at 45 CFR 170.102 and has been certified as meeting certain other criteria set forth in ONC's 2015 Edition health IT certification criteria at 45 CFR 170.315 as further described in § 414.1305. Applying the Shared Savings Program's definition at § 425.20, ACOs under the Shared Savings Program must use EHR technology meeting the Quality Payment Program's definition of CEHRT at § 414.1305to meet the requirements set forth in our regulation at § 425.506(f). As discussed in section III.R. of this proposed rule, in the Health Data, Technology, and Interoperability: Certification Program Updates, Algorithm Transparency, and Information Sharing proposed rule (88 FR 23758), which appeared in the April 18, 2023 Federal Register , ONC has proposed to discontinue the year-themed “editions,” which ONC first adopted in 2012, to distinguish between sets of health IT certification criteria finalized in different rules. ONC is proposing to instead maintain a single set of “ONC Certification Criteria for Health IT,” which would be updated in an incremental fashion in closer alignment to standards development cycles and regular health information technology (IT) development timelines (88 FR 23750). As further discussed in section III.R. of this proposed rule, we are proposing to modify the Quality Payment Program's definition of CEHRT at § 414.1305 to flexibly incorporate any changes by ONC to its definition of Base EHR and its certification criteria for Health IT.

(2) Removing CEHRT Use Threshold Requirements and Requiring Reporting of the MIPS Promoting Interoperability Performance Category

In order to streamline CEHRT threshold requirements for ACOs and align with the Quality Reporting Program's Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MIPS), we propose to sunset the Shared Savings Program CEHRT threshold requirements and modify our regulations at § 425.506(f) to indicate that they will be applicable only through performance year 2023. We further propose, for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, unless otherwise excluded, to require that all MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), and Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305 of this subchapter) participating in the ACO, regardless of track, satisfy all of the following:

• Report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability (PI) performance category measures and requirements to MIPS according to 42 CFR part 414 subpart O as either of the following—

++ All MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and partial QPs participating in the ACO as an individual, group, or virtual group; or

++ The ACO as an APM entity.

• Earn a MIPS performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level.

A MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity may be excluded from the requirements proposed at § 425.507(a) if the MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity—

• Does not exceed the low volume threshold set forth at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii);

• Is an eligible clinician as defined at § 414.1305 who is not a MIPS eligible clinician and has opted to voluntarily report measures and activities for MIPS as set forth in § 414.1310(b)(2); or

• Has not earned a performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category because the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category has been reweighted in accordance with applicable policies set forth at § 414.1380(c)(2).

We propose to codify this new requirement at § 425.507.

Specifically, we propose that any requirements applicable to MIPS eligible clinicians reporting on objectives and measures specified by CMS for the MIPS PI category would apply to MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs participating in an ACO at § 425.507(a). We further propose that if any of these requirements for a MIPS eligible clinician reporting for the MIPS PI category, including objectives and measures, are amended through rulemaking (such as adoption, modification, or removal of an objective or measure), then the new or modified requirements will also be applicable to MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs participating in an ACO under § 425.507. For instance, in section IV.A.4.f.(4) of this proposed rule, we are proposing several modifications to the MIPS PI performance category's requirements, including modifying the performance period at § 414.1320 as well as specific measures such as the High Priority Safety Assurance Factors for EHR Resilience (SAFER) Guides measure. To the extent these or other policies are finalized through rulemaking, then these requirements would also be applicable to ACO participants as provided by our proposal here.

To further align with applicable requirements for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category, we are proposing that MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, Partial QPs, and ACOs as APM entities may be exempt from our proposed regulation at § 425.507(a) if the MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity: (1) does not exceed the low volume threshold set forth at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii); (2) is an eligible clinician as defined at § 414.1305 who is not a MIPS eligible clinician and has opted to voluntarily report measures and activities for MIPS as set forth in § 414.1310(b)(2); or (3) has not earned a performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category because the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category has been reweighted in accordance with applicable policies set forth at § 414.1380(c)(2). However, if such MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs do report the MIPS PI performance category as an individual, group, or virtual group or the ACO reports MIPS PI performance category as an APM entity, the MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QP the exemption would not apply for purposes of satisfying our proposed regulation at § 425.507.

Exclusions to MIPS eligible clinicians described at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii) include eligible clinicians who do not exceed the MIPS low volume threshold. Eligible clinicians who are not MIPS eligible clinicians have the option to voluntarily report measures and activities for MIPS as described at § 414.1310(b)(2). Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHC) or Rural Health Clinics (RHC) who provide services that are billed exclusively under the FQHC or RHC payment methodologies may voluntarily report the MIPS PI performance category as a group, virtual group, or APM entity. MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs practicing in FQHCs or RHCs who provide services that are billed exclusively under FQHC or RHC payment methodologies may voluntarily report the MIPS PI performance category as an individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity. It is important to note that exclusions to MIPS eligible clinicians as described at § 414.1310(b)(1)(i) and (ii) are not applicable to our proposal at § 425.507 because QPs and Partial QPs are required to report MIPS PI performance category for purposes of satisfying the Shared Savings Program proposal at § 425.507. Examples of applicable exclusions under § 414.1380(c)(2) for reweighting of the MIPS PI performance category include, but are not limited to, the following:

• MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs participating in the ACO who are granted a hardship exception under § 414.1380(c)(2)(i)(C) at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level.

• MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs that are eligible for reweighting of the PI performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level as described at § 414.1380(c)(2)(i)(A)(4).

• MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs that are eligible for reweighting of the PI performance category as described at § 414.1380(c)(2)(i)(A)( 4 ).

We believe that incorporating MIPS PI performance category's requirements into the Shared Savings Program will alleviate the burden that the current policy creates for ACOs. Because the Shared Savings Program CEHRT attestation requirement and the MIPS PI category requirements are not the same, ACOs have the burden of managing compliance with two different CEHRT program requirements. In finalizing the Shared Savings Program CEHRT attestation in the CY 2019 PFS, we stated our desire to continue to promote and encourage CEHRT use by ACOs and their ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers, and our desire to better align with the goals of the Quality Payment Program and the criteria for participation in certain alternative payment models tested by the Innovation Center (83 FR 59983). Given our unified goal and vision for the use of CEHRT, we believe our proposal at § 425.507 will allow ACOs to focus on a unified set of program requirements for the use of CEHRT and reduce the administrative burden of managing compliance with a different set of program requirements with the same aim.

While ACOs would be able to report the MIPS PI category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level for purposes of satisfy our proposal at § 425.507, we encourage ACOs to evaluate reporting the MIPS PI performance category at the APM entity level for purposes of satisfying the Shared Savings Program regulation proposed at § 425.507. In the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we finalized a policy to introduce a voluntary reporting option for APM entities to report the MIPS PI performance category at the APM entity level beginning with the CY 2023 performance period (87 FR 70033). For purposes of MIPS scoring and payment adjustments, if the ACO reports the MIPS PI performance category at the APM entity level, the APM entity PI performance category score would be used to generate the APM entity level score for purposes of scoring the MIPS PI performance category. If the ACO does not report PI at APM entity level, the ACO's individual and group scores would be calculated as a weighted average up to the APM entity level to generate the APM entity level score for purposes of scoring the MIPS PI performance category. If an eligible clinician reports PI at the individual or group level under traditional MIPS or the APM Performance Pathway (APP) in addition to reporting the MIPS PI performance at the APM entity level via the APP, for purposes of MIPS scoring and payment adjustments, that eligible clinician would receive the higher of their individual, group, or APM entity PI performance category score. For more information about reporting the PI performance category at the APM entity level, we direct readers to the MIPS Promoting Interoperability User Guide, which is updated each performance year, in the QPP Resource library https://qpp.cms.gov/resources/resource-library . We anticipate releasing sub-regulatory guidance for ACOs that participate in the Shared Savings Program about voluntarily reporting the MIPS PI performance category at the APM entity level in future performance years.

We are seeking public comment on our proposal that, for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, unless otherwise excluded, to require that all MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), and Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305) participating in the ACO, regardless of track, satisfy all of the following:

• Report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability (PI) performance category measures and requirements to MIPS according to 42 CFR part 414 subpart O as either of the following—

++ All MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and partial QPs participating in the ACO as an individual, group, or virtual group; or

++ The ACO as an APM entity.

• Earn a MIPS performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level.

A MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity may be excluded from the requirements proposed at § 425.507(a) if the MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity—

• Does not exceed the low volume threshold set forth at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii);

• Is an eligible clinician as defined at § 414.1305 who is not a MIPS eligible clinician and has opted to voluntarily report measures and activities for MIPS as set forth in § 414.1310(b)(2); or

• Has not earned a performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category because the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category has been reweighted in accordance with applicable policies set forth at § 414.1380(c)(2).

We propose to codify this new requirement at § 425.507.

We are also seeking public comment on an alternative proposal to narrow the proposal to require that ACOs to report the measures and requirements under the MIPS PI performance category, in accordance with our regulations at 42 CFR part 414 subpart O, at the APM entity level. This alternative proposal would remove the option for MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), and Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305) participating in the ACO to report the MIPS PI performance category at the individual, group, or virtual group level for purposes of satisfying our proposal at § 425.507.

(3) Updating Public Reporting Requirements

As described in the CY 2019 final rule (80 FR 32813 through 32815), we believe that one important aspect of patient-centered care is patient engagement and transparency, which can be achieved by the public reporting of ACO quality and cost performance. Public reporting helps to hold ACOs accountable and may improve a beneficiary's ability to make informed health care choices as well as facilitate an ACO's ability to improve the quality and efficiency of its care. To ensure our public reporting requirements reflect our proposal to require reporting of objectives, measures, and activities under the MIPS PI performance category as discussed above, we also are proposing to require ACOs to publicly report the number of MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), and Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305) participating in the ACO that earn a MIPS performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level as proposed at § 425.507. We are proposing to codify this requirement at § 425.308(b)(9).

We are proposing that MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs who would be excluded from reporting under the proposed regulation at § 425.507(b) as discussed previously may be excluded from the number of MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, or Partial QPs that the ACO publicly reports under our proposed regulation at § 425.308(b)(9). However, if such MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs do report the MIPS PI performance category as an individual, group, or virtual group or the ACO reports the MIPS PI performance category as an APM entity, the MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs should be included in the number of MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs that the ACO publicly reports under our proposed regulation at § 425.308(b)(9).

(4) Updating Annual Certification Requirements

As noted in section III.G.2.h.(2) of this proposed rule, we believe that incorporating MIPS PI performance category's requirements will alleviate confusion for ACOs and the use of CEHRT under the Shared Savings Program. Additionally, we find that the MIPS PI performance category's reporting requirements are more comprehensive and better address the key functions that facilitate better care coordination and quality measurement for ACOs. This change would further align the Shared Savings Program with the MIPS program and allow for greater insight into CEHRT use among ACO clinicians.

Currently, under § 425.302(a)(3)(iii), at the end of each performance year, ACOs must certify that the percentage of eligible clinicians participating in the ACO that use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers meets or exceeds the applicable CEHRT threshold percentage specified at § 425.506(f). As discussed in section III.G.2.h.(4). of this proposed rule, we are proposing to sunset the Shared Savings Program CEHRT threshold requirements and modify § 425.506(f) to indicate that they will end with performance year 2023.

To ensure our certification requirements align with our proposal in section III.G.2.h.(2) of this proposed rule, we also propose to revise our regulation at § 425.302(a)(3)(iii) to make the current Shared Savings Program Annual Certification requirement applicable for only performance years 2019 through 2023. That is, we are proposing to sunset the CEHRT certification requirement in the Shared Savings Program by amending regulations to no longer require ACO clinicians to report the percentage of eligible clinicians participating in the ACO that use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers meets or exceeds the applicable percentage specified at § 425.506(f).

We are seeking public comment on our proposal to sunset the CEHRT certification requirement in the Shared Savings Program at §§ 425.302(a)(3)(iii) and 425.506(f) and to add new requirements at § 425.507, for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, unless otherwise excluded, to require that all MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), and Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305) participating in the ACO, regardless of track, satisfy all of the following:

• Report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability (PI) performance category measures and requirements to MIPS according to 42 CFR part 414 subpart O as either of the following—

++ All MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and partial QPs participating in the ACO as an individual, group, or virtual group; or

++ The ACO as an APM entity.

• Earn a MIPS performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level.

A MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity may be excluded from the requirements proposed at § 425.507(a) if the MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity—

• Does not exceed the low volume threshold set forth at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii);

• Is an eligible clinician as defined at § 414.1305 who is not a MIPS eligible clinician and has opted to voluntarily report measures and activities for MIPS as set forth in § 414.1310(b)(2); or

• Has not earned a performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category because the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category has been reweighted in accordance with applicable policies set forth at § 414.1380(c)(2).

We also seek comment on our proposal to add a new requirement for public reporting in § 425.308(b)(9), requiring that the ACO must publicly report the number of MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), and Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305) participating in the ACO that earn a MIPS performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level as proposed at § 425.507.

i. MIPS Value Pathway (MVP) Reporting for Specialists in Shared Savings Program ACOs—Request for Information (RFI)

In the CY 2021 PFS proposed rule (85 FR 50232 and 50233), we proposed that for performance year 2021 and subsequent performance years, ACOs would be assessed on a measure set under the APP for Shared Savings Program ACOs. As part of finalizing the APP measure set (85 FR 34727), we stated that the transition to the APP measure set was intended to reduce reporting burden and eliminate differences in the way ACOs are scored compared to their MIPS eligible clinicians, while also moving toward a more outcome-based, primary care focused measure set. Additionally, we stated that we selected the measures to be included because they are broadly applicable for the primary care population and population health goals that are associated with the Shared Savings Program.

We received public comments raising concerns about the challenges and applicability of these measures to specialists that are part of their ACOs (85 FR 34727). Commenters provided feedback that: reducing the number of ACO quality measures would make specialists less likely to participate in the Shared Savings Program; the proposed measures are not relevant to ophthalmology specialty practices and suggested that the same measure sets used in MIPS be permitted for reporting through the APP or a protocol be put in place to determine if the measures are relevant to the clinicians reporting under the APP; CMS should work with interested parties to refine the current set of measures to make it more appropriate for ACOs, which are responsible for total cost of care for the populations they serve; CMS should clarify if the outcome measures selected are representative of all of the different types of populations that ACOs treat and recommended that CMS take patient compliance and case mix into consideration when selecting measures because some patients may take longer to achieve health goals and ACOs may not have the same relative volume of patients with diagnoses such as diabetes and hypertension.

In the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39270), we solicited comments on reporting options for specialist providers within an ACO. Specifically, we stated that we have heard from interested parties that the population health/primary care focused measures in the APP are not applicable for specialist providers within an ACO. We noted in the final rule that we may consider feedback we received to inform future rulemaking (86 FR 65264).

In the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65376), MVPs were finalized to be available for reporting beginning with the CY 2023 performance period of MIPS, with the notion that MVPs will be implemented through notice and comment rulemaking over the next few years to offer clinically relevant quality reporting for specialists and more granular specialty data (through subgroup reporting) for patients to make informed decisions about the care they receive. In the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65376), MVPs were finalized to be available for reporting beginning with the CY 2023 performance period of MIPS, with the notion that MVPs will be implemented through notice and comment rulemaking over the next few years to offer clinically relevant quality reporting for specialists and more granular specialty data (through subgroup reporting) for patients to make informed decisions about the care they receive. Building upon our commitment to align quality measures across CMS, 150 we direct readers to section IV.A.4.a. of this proposed rule where we propose to create a primary care MVP. We note that the primary care MVP would create continuity between the primary care measures assessed under MIPS and the measures providers would be accountable for in the Medicare Shared Savings Program.

150 Jacobs D, Schreiber M, Seshamani M, Tsai D, Fowler E, Fleisher L. Aligning Quality Measures across CMS—The Universal Foundation. New England Journal of Medicine, March 2, 2023, available at https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp2215539 .

In light of the public comments described above and the finalization and continued development of the MVPs, we believe we need incentives for specialists in Shared Savings Program ACOs to report clinically relevant quality measures and to allow patients, referring clinicians, and ACOs to have more information regarding specialists involved in patient care. We believe that encouraging specialists to report on MVPs will lead to increased specialty engagement in the Shared Savings Program, thereby holding specialists accountable for quality improvement.

Beginning in CY 2023, specialists that report under MIPS, including specialists that participate in Shared Savings Program ACOs, have the option to register to report MVPs for the applicable CY performance period as described at § 414.1365(b) as a group, subgroup, or individual and to report on relevant MVP quality measures as described at § 414.1365(c). In this proposed rule, we are soliciting comments on scoring incentives that would be applied to an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score beginning in performance year 2025 when specialists who participate in the ACO report quality MVPs as described at § 414.1365(c)(1).

Similar to the health equity adjustment finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69838), we are considering bonus points for ACOs with specialists reporting quality MVPs as described at § 414.1365(c)(1) that would be applied after MIPS scoring is complete. ACOs may receive up to a maximum of 10 additional points added to their ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score if they meet the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1), in addition to administering the CAHPS for MIPS survey. In addition to specialists that participate in the ACO reporting quality MVPs described at § 414.1365(c)(1), an ACO would be required to report all measures in the APP measure set, meet the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) to be eligible for bonus points.

Our overarching intent is to have specialists participate in ACOs in a meaningful way and to collect quality data that is comparable to data reported by other specialty providers in quality MVPs. We are seeking feedback on our overall approach to align quality measures in the Adult Universal Foundation with measures used for evaluation in the Medicare Shared Savings Program. We are also seeking feedback on the following aspects of MVP reporting for specialists in Shared Savings Program ACOs:

• In order to highlight specialty clinical practice within ACOs, how should we encourage specialist reporting of MVPs?

• How should we encourage the reporting of MVPs to collect quality data that is comparable to data reported by other specialty providers in quality MVPs and to address clinician concerns over measure appropriateness?

• How should we consider encouraging specialists to report the MVP that is most relevant to their clinical practice?

• How should we distinguish bonus points for ACOs that report on a larger volume of patients through MVPs?

• How should we provide ACOs with bonus points to their health equity adjusted quality performance score when an ACO's specialty clinicians report MVPs?

• What concerns and considerations should we be aware of when assessing ACOs for quality performance based on reporting quality measures within MVPs?

• Would incentivizing specialty MVPs create a disincentive for ACOs to report primary care focused APP and/or MVP measures?

• In the event that MIPS quality measures in MVPs are excluded under § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A), should we apply the proposed Shared Savings Program scoring policy for excluded APP measures as described in section III.G.2.f. of this proposed rule?

• As noted above, providing ACOs with bonus points to their health equity adjusted quality performance score when ACOs' specialty clinicians report MVPs serves to encourage reporting of MVPs. Therefore, we do not intend to establish bonus points as a permanent policy. We seek comment on how long we should have bonus points in place in order to incentivize MVP reporting.

• Once specialists are reporting MVPs, overall aggregate specialty performance within an ACO could be assessed. We seek comment on if and how CMS should consider assessing overall specialty performance as part of the APP in the future.

We note that in section IV.A.1.b.(2) of this proposed rule, we included an RFI on how we can leverage MIPS policies to enable more Medicare beneficiaries to benefit from accountable care relationships within APMs and provide rigorous performance standards for those clinicians who report MVPs and remain in MIPS.

j. Proposal To Revise the Requirement To Meet the Case Minimum Requirement for Quality Performance Standard Determinations

(1) Background

We require ACOs to meet the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 to determine the quality performance standard for ACOs in the first performance year of their first agreement period, for the eCQM/MIPS CQM incentive for performance year 2024, and for the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy (§ 425.512(a)(2), (a)(5)(i)(A)(2), (c)(3)).

Section 414.1380 includes policies related to all of MIPS scoring and is not specific to the Quality performance category. Further, the phrase “case minimum” is mentioned in multiple paragraphs at § 414.1380. The broad reference to § 414.1380 under § 425.512(a)(2), (a)(5)(i)(A)(2), and (c)(3) does not specify which paragraph at § 414.1380 is applicable when applying case minimum for purposes of determining an ACO's quality performance standard. We believe that the references to meeting the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 in the context of determining an ACO's quality performance standard under § 425.512(a)(2), (a)(5)(i)(A)(2), and (c)(3) is not sufficient in describing our policy's intent, which is to apply the MIPS Quality performance category scoring policies as described at § 414.1380(b)(1) in determining the ACO quality performance standard.

(2) Proposed Revisions

In order to alleviate confusion regarding the reference to case minimum in determining the ACO quality performance standard, for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, we propose to replace the references to meeting the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 from § 425.512(a)(2), (a)(5)(i)(A)(2), and (c)(3) with the requirement that the ACO must receive a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) in order to meet the quality performance standard. This proposal would correct the purpose of our reference to case minimums by incorporating all of the applications of case minimums in the MIPS Quality performance category scoring policies in our policies to determine an ACO's quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program. For example, under current policy at § 414.1380(b)(1)(i)(A)(2)(ii) in performance year 2024, if an ACO does not meet the case minimum requirement on an administrative claims-based measure, that measure would be excluded from the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category measure achievement points (numerator) and total available measure achievement points (denominator). If the ACO in this example meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for the ten CMS Web Interface measures or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and administers a CAHPS for MIPS survey, the ACO would receive a MIPS Quality performance category score. The resulting MIPS Quality performance category score in this example would be used to determine the ACO's quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program.

All ACOs that participated in the Shared Savings Program were affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance as described at § 425.512(c)(1) for performance years 2021, 2022, and 2023 due to the COVID-19 public health emergency. We believe that any unintended impact of meeting the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 in evaluating an ACO's quality performance standard for performance years 2021, 2022, and 2023 was mitigated by the application of the extreme and uncontrollable circumstance policy. Specifically, it is not our intent to exclude an ACO who received a MIPS Quality performance category score, but reported less than 20 cases on any measure(s) in the APP measure set from achieving the quality performance standard under § 425.512(a)(2), (a)(5)(i)(A)(2), and (c)(3), if that ACO is otherwise eligible to meet the quality performance standard.

Separately, we propose to address a gap in the current rule regarding the “minimum beneficiary sampling requirement” at § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B). This provision provides for a 10-point reduction in the total available measure achievement points for MIPS eligible clinicians that submit five measures or fewer and register for the CAHPS for MIPS survey but do not meet the minimum beneficiary sampling requirement. As the case minimum is not applicable to the CAHPS for MIPS survey, we did not intend to preclude ACOs that do not meet the minimum beneficiary sampling requirement to field a CAHPS for MIPS survey from meeting the Shared Savings Program quality performance standard or the alternative quality performance standard. We propose revisions to the following regulation text sections:

• At § 425.512(a)(2)(ii) and (iii), we propose to replace the phrase “case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 of this subchapter” with the phrase “receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter.”

Additionally, we propose to replace the phrase “CAHPS for MIPS survey” with the phrase “CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter).” To read as follows: For the first performance year of an ACO's first agreement period under the Shared Savings Program, the ACO would meet the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program, if:

++ For performance year 2024, the ACO reports data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter on the ten CMS Web Interface measures or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, and the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter), and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter.

++ For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, the ACO reports data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter on the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter), and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter

• At § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)(2), we propose to remove the phrase “and the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 of this subchapter.” As follows: For performance year 2024, under the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive, the ACO would meet the quality performance standard used to determine eligibility for shared savings and to avoid maximum shared losses, as applicable, if the ACO: (1) meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs; (2) achieves a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and (3) achieves a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining five measures in the APP measure set.

++ We are not including a requirement under § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)(2) for the ACO to receive a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1). As described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii), the MIPS Quality performance category score is the sum of all the measure achievement points divided by the sum of total available measure achievement points for the quality performance category. Therefore, we do not believe that it would be appropriate to require an ACO to receive a MIPS Quality performance category score in determining whether the ACO met the Shared Savings Program quality performance standard based on measure-level performance (such as in the case of the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive).

• At § 425.512(c)(3), we propose to remove the phrase “case minimum” for performance 2024 and subsequent performance years and replace with the phrase “receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter.” To read as follows: Under the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy, for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, if the ACO reports quality data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, CMS would use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year.

We are proposing to revise § 425.512(a)(5)(iii)(A) and (B) to read as follows:

• For performance year 2024, the ACO does not report any of the ten CMS Web Interface measures, any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter) under the APP.

• For performance year 2025 and subsequent years, the ACO does not report any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter) under the APP.

Additionally, we propose to add clarifying language to the proposed redesignated paragraph (b)(2) of § 425.512 on calculating an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score as follows:

• For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, CMS will calculate the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score as the sum of: the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score for all measures in the APP measure set, and the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points calculated in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section, to which the sum of these values may not exceed 100 percent, if the following requirements are met: (1) The ACO reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs in the APP measure set; (2) meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs; and (3) administers the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B)).

3. Determining Beneficiary Assignment Under the Shared Savings Program

a. Proposed Modifications to the Step-Wise Assignment Methodology and Approach To Identifying the Assignable Beneficiary Population

(1) Background

(a) Background on Assignment Methodology

Section 1899(c)(1) of the Act, as amended by the CURES Act and the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, provides that the Secretary shall determine an appropriate method to assign Medicare FFS beneficiaries to an ACO based on their utilization of primary care services provided by physicians in the ACO and, in the case of performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2019, services provided by a FQHC or RHC. As we have explained in earlier rulemaking, the term “assignment” for purposes of the Shared Savings Program in no way implies any limits, restrictions, or diminishment of the rights of Medicare FFS beneficiaries to exercise freedom of choice in the physicians and other health care practitioners from whom they receive covered services. In the context of the Shared Savings Program, “assignment” refers to an operational process by which Medicare will determine whether a beneficiary has chosen to receive a sufficient level of certain primary care services from physicians and other health care practitioners associated with a specific ACO so that the ACO may be appropriately designated as exercising basic responsibility for that beneficiary's care. 151

151 See for example, 76 FR 67851, and 83 FR 67863.

The regulations governing the assignment methodology under the Shared Savings Program are in 42 CFR part 425, subpart E. Under claims-based assignment, we determine a Medicare FFS beneficiary is assigned to an ACO if the beneficiary meets the criteria in § 425.401(a) to be eligible for assignment to an ACO, and the beneficiary's utilization of primary care services meets the criteria established under the assignment methodology specified in §§ 425.402 and 425.404. Section 425.402 specifies a step-wise assignment methodology for determining an ACO's assigned beneficiary population based on beneficiaries' use of primary care services. In accordance with § 425.402(b)(1), as a “pre-step” in the two-step claims-based assignment process, CMS identifies all beneficiaries who had at least one primary care service furnished by a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO and who is a primary care physician as defined under § 425.20 or has one of the primary specialty designations specified in § 425.402(c). This pre-step is designed to satisfy the statutory requirement under section 1899(c)(1) of the Act that beneficiaries be assigned to an ACO based on their use of primary care services furnished by physicians participating in the ACO. Beneficiaries who meet the pre-step requirement are then assigned to an ACO through either one of two steps specified in § 425.402(b)(3) and (b)(4).

Under the first step of the assignment process, a beneficiary who is eligible for assignment and meets the pre-step requirement is assigned to an ACO if the allowed charges for primary care services furnished to the beneficiary during the assignment window by primary care physicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and clinical nurse specialists who are ACO professionals in the ACO are greater than the allowed charges for primary care services furnished during the assignment window by primary care physicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, or clinical nurse specialists who are ACO professionals in any other ACO, or not affiliated with any ACO and identified by a Medicare-enrolled billing TIN. The second step of the assignment methodology applies to the remainder of the beneficiaries who are eligible for assignment and meet the pre-step requirement, who have not had a primary care service rendered during the assignment window by any primary care physician, nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or clinical nurse specialist, either inside or outside the ACO. The beneficiary will be assigned to an ACO if the allowed charges for primary care services furnished to the beneficiary during the assignment window by physicians who are ACO professionals with specialty designations specified in § 425.402(c) are greater than the allowed charges for primary care services furnished during the assignment window by physicians with such specialty designations who are ACO professionals in any other ACO, or who are unaffiliated with an ACO and are identified by a Medicare-enrolled billing TIN.

The Shared Savings Program step-wise assignment process is offered in two similar, but distinct, claims-based assignment methodologies, prospective assignment and preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. Consistent with the requirements of section 1899(c)(2)(A) of the Act, we offer all Shared Savings Program ACOs the opportunity to select their assignment methodology annually, starting with agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019. We use the same step-wise assignment methodology under § 425.402 to assign beneficiaries to ACOs under prospective assignment and ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation.

In the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32699) we finalized the definition of “assignment window” under § 425.20 to mean the 12-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO. As described in the December 2018 final rule, the assignment window for ACOs under prospective assignment is a 12-month period offset from the calendar year (for example, October through September preceding the calendar year), while for ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, the assignment window is the 12-month period based on the calendar year (83 FR 67861). Operationally, in determining beneficiary assignment for each performance year and benchmark year, we identify allowed charges for services billed under the HCPCS and CPT codes included in the applicable definition of primary care services under § 425.400(c), and according to the step-wise assignment methodology specified in subpart E of the Shared Savings Program's regulations, during all months of the 12-month period of the assignment window.

The step-wise assignment methodology was initially established with the November 2011 final rule and was modified through subsequent rulemaking. For instance, with the June 2015 final rule, we modified the approach to include claims for primary care services furnished by non-physician practitioners (nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and clinical nurse specialists) in step one of the assignment methodology rather than in step two, and to exclude services provided by certain physician specialties from step two of the assignment process. We refer readers to the November 2011 final rule and the June 2015 final rule for a discussion of the relevant background and related considerations (see 76 FR 67853 through 67858, and 80 FR 32748 through 32755). Generally, as we have previously explained in rulemaking, the step-wise assignment methodology maintains the statutory requirement to conduct claims-based beneficiary assignment based on beneficiaries' utilization of physician primary care services, recognizing the necessary and appropriate role of certain specialists in providing primary care services, such as in areas with primary care physician shortages (see, for example, 76 FR 67853 through 67855; see also 80 FR 32748 and 32754). Further, including services furnished by nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and clinical nurse specialists in determining where a beneficiary has received the plurality of primary care services in step one of the assignment methodology helps ensure that a beneficiary is assigned to the ACO whose ACO participants are actually providing the plurality of primary care for that beneficiary, and thus, should be responsible for managing the patient's overall care, or is not assigned to any ACO if the plurality of the beneficiary's primary care is furnished by practitioners in a non-ACO entity (see, for example, 80 FR 32748).

Various Shared Savings Program operations are based on the ACO's assigned population, or consider the size of the ACO's assigned population, which are summarized as follows:

• Within the Shared Savings Program's financial methodology:

++ CMS determines benchmark and performance year expenditures based on the ACO's assigned population as specified under subpart G of the regulations.

++ CMS determines the counties to include in the ACO's regional service area based on the ACO's assigned population (refer to definition of ACO's regional service area in § 425.20), and uses the ACO's assigned population in determining the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO (see §§ 425.601(a)(5)(v) and 425.652(a)(5)(v)) which is applied in calculating the two-way blend of national and regional growth rates used to trend forward BY1 and BY2 expenditures to BY3 according to §§ 425.601(a)(5)(iv) and 425.652(a)(5)(iv) and as part of the blended growth rates used to update the benchmark according to §§ 425.601(b) and 425.652(b)(2). CMS also uses the ACO's regional service area to determine the regional adjustment to the ACO's historical benchmark according to § 425.656.

++ CMS considers the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population that is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid and the difference between the ACO's weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 taken across the four Medicare enrollment types and when calculating the offset factor applied to negative regional adjustments (see § 425.656(c)(4)).

++ CMS considers the size of the ACO's assigned population in calculating the proration factor when determining the ACO's eligibility for the prior savings adjustment (see § 425.658(b)(3)) as well as in determining the minimum savings rate (MSR)/minimum loss rate (MLR) for ACOs that select the option to have their MSR/MLR calculated based on the number of beneficiaries assigned to the ACO (refer to § 425.605(b)(2)(i)(C) (BASIC track) and § 425.610(b)(1)(iii) (ENHANCED track)).

++ CMS determines average prospective HCC risk scores for assigned beneficiaries for purposes of adjusting assigned beneficiary expenditures for severity and case mix (refer to §§ 425.601(a)(3), 425.601(a)(10), 425.605(a)(1), 425.610(a)(2), 425.652(a)(3), and 425.652(a)(10)), adjusting for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's assigned beneficiary population and the assignable beneficiary population for the ACO's regional service area according to §§ 425.601(a)(8)(i)(C) and 425.656(b)(3), and adjusting the flat dollar amount ACPT for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's BY3 assigned beneficiary population and the national assignable FFS population according to § 425.660(b)(4).

• In determinations related to an ACO's eligibility for participation for the Shared Savings Program:

++ CMS determines expenditures based on the ACO's assigned population when identifying if the ACO is a high revenue or low revenue ACO (as defined under § 425.20).

++ CMS considers whether an ACO meets the requirement to have at least 5,000 Medicare FFS assigned beneficiaries (see § 425.110).

++ CMS uses the ACO's number of assigned beneficiaries in calculating and recalculating the amount of the repayment mechanism required for ACOs participating under a two-sided model (see § 425.204(f)).

• For ACOs eligible to receive advance investment payments (see § 425.630(b)), CMS considers the size of the ACO's assigned population and the risk factors-based score of those beneficiaries in determining the quarterly payment amount (see § 425.630(f)).

• For ACOs that meet the reporting requirements for receiving a health equity adjusted quality performance score (see § 425.512(b)), CMS considers the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population that is underserved in determining the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points (see § 425.512(b)(2)(iv)).

• For ACOs affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance, CMS considers the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in an area identified under the Quality Payment Program as being affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance in determining the ACO's quality score (see § 425.512(c)(1)(i)). CMS considers the percentage of the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary population affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance in determining the amount of shared losses owed by ACOs under a two-sided model (refer to §§ 425.605(f)(1) and 425.610(i)(1)).

• For ACOs that have established a beneficiary incentive program, beneficiaries assigned to an ACO who receive a qualifying service are eligible to receive an incentive payment (see § 425.304(c)(3)(ii) through (iv)).

• In accordance with the Shared Savings Program regulations under subpart H, CMS provides ACOs with certain aggregate reports and beneficiary-identifiable claims data on the ACO's assigned beneficiary population.

Further, a non-claims-based process for voluntary alignment applies to all Shared Savings Program ACOs and is used to supplement claims-based assignment. Section 1899(c) of the Act, as amended by section 50331 of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, requires the Secretary to permit a Medicare FFS beneficiary to voluntarily identify an ACO professional as their primary care provider for purposes of assignment to an ACO. In the November 2018 final rule (83 FR 59959 through 59964), we finalized changes to the beneficiary voluntary alignment policies CMS previously established to implement the requirements under section 1899(c)(2)(B) of the Act (refer to § 425.402(e), as revised). In the November 2018 final rule (83 FR 59964), we revised the requirements related to primary care services and practitioner specialties previously established for the voluntary alignment process. As a result of this change, a voluntarily aligned beneficiary is no longer required to receive a primary care service from an ACO professional to be assigned to the ACO in which the beneficiary's designated primary care clinician is participating. Additionally, the revision established that a beneficiary can be voluntarily aligned to an ACO based on their selection of any ACO professional as their primary clinician, regardless of the ACO professional's specialty and including nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and clinical nurse specialists. As specified in § 425.402(e)(1), and subject to § 425.402(e)(2), assignment under voluntary alignment supersedes any assignment that otherwise may have occurred under claims-based assignment.

(b) Background on Identification and Uses of the Assignable Beneficiary Population Under the Shared Savings Program

To identify the assignable beneficiary population, which is used in program financial calculations, we apply a similar logic as is used to identify the Medicare beneficiaries who can be assigned to an ACO in the pre-step to the claims-based assignment methodology (see, for example, 81 FR 5843, and 81 FR 37985). In the June 2016 final rule (81 FR 37950), we finalized policies to use the assignable beneficiary population (a subset of the larger population of Medicare FFS beneficiaries) as the basis of certain calculations that had previously been based on the overall Medicare FFS population, including expenditures used to trend and update ACOs' historical benchmarks and to establish the truncation thresholds used in expenditure calculations. In the June 2016 final rule, we finalized the definition of “assignable beneficiary” under § 425.20 to mean a Medicare FFS beneficiary who receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 12-month assignment window from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c). We specified that the assignable population used to calculate national and regional benchmarking factors was to be identified using the 12-month calendar year assignment window corresponding to the benchmark or performance year for all ACOs, regardless of assignment methodology which applied to the ACO, which at that time was determined by an ACO's track (see 81 FR 37985 through 37988). We explained our belief that using assignable beneficiaries across all program calculations based on national and regional FFS expenditures would result in factors that are generally more comparable to ACO expenditures than factors based on the overall Medicare FFS population, which can include non-utilizers of health care services and other beneficiaries not eligible for assignment (see, for example, 81 FR 5843 and 5844).

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69929 through 69932), we finalized a modification to this policy, applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, to calculate risk-adjusted regional expenditures and the share of assignable beneficiaries assigned to an ACO using county-level values based on the assignable population identified using an assignment window that is consistent with the ACO's assignment methodology selection for the applicable performance year. (Refer to §§ 425.652(a)(5)(v)(A) and (b)(2)(iv)(A), and 425.654(a)(1)(i).) Under this approach, for ACOs selecting prospective assignment, we will use an assignable population of beneficiaries that is identified based on the offset assignment window (for example, October through September preceding the calendar year) and for ACOs selecting preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, we will use an assignable population of beneficiaries identified based on the calendar year assignment window (87 FR 69930). We also specified in the CY 2023 PFS final rule that we would continue to compute all factors used in calculations that are based on the national assignable FFS population using an assignable population identified based on the calendar year assignment window. (Refer to 87 FR 69931.) For ACOs participating under agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, and before January 1, 2024, we will continue to identify the assignable population that is the basis for calculating national and regional factors using the 12-month period based on a calendar year, which aligns with the assignment window for preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, regardless of the ACO's assignment methodology. (See § 425.601. See also, 87 FR 69929, for a description of relevant background.)

The assignable beneficiary population is used in various calculations under the Shared Savings Program, including the following:

• CMS determines the 99th percentile of national Medicare fee-for-service expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for purposes of truncating beneficiary expenditures in order to minimize variation from catastrophically large claims (see §§ 425.601(a)(4) and (c)(3), 425.605(a)(3), 425.610(a)(4)(ii), 425.652(a)(4), and 425.654(a)(3)).

• CMS determines average county fee-for-service expenditures based on expenditures for the assignable population of beneficiaries in each county of an ACO's regional service area (see §§ 425.601(c) and 425.654(a)) for purposes of calculating the ACO's regional fee-for-service expenditures (see §§ 425.601(d) and 425.654(b)). CMS also determines the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO (see §§ 425.601(a)(5)(v) and 425.652(a)(5)(v)). The ACO's regional fee-for-service expenditures and the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO are used in the following calculations:

++ Trend forward BY1 and BY2 expenditures to BY3 according to §§ 425.601(a)(5) and 425.652(a)(5).

++ Determine the blended growth rates used to update the benchmark according to §§ 425.601(b) and 425.652(b)(2).

++ Determine the adjustment to the ACO's benchmark according to §§ 425.601(a)(8) and 425.652(a)(8).

• CMS determines national per capita fee-for-service expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for purposes of capping the regional adjustment to the ACO's historical benchmark according to §§ 425.601(a)(8)(ii)(C) and 425.656(c)(3), capping the prior savings adjustment according to § 425.652(a)(8)(iv), and determining a flat dollar amount ACPT according to § 425.660(b)(3).

• CMS determines national growth rates for assignable beneficiaries that are used to trend forward BY1 and BY2 expenditures to BY3 according to §§ 425.601(a)(5)(ii) and 425.652(a)(5)(ii) and to determine the blended growth rates used update the benchmark according to §§ 425.601(b)(2) and 425.652(b)(2)(i).

• CMS determines average prospective HCC risk scores for assignable beneficiaries for purposes of adjusting county fee-for-service expenditures for severity and case mix of assignable beneficiaries in the county according to §§ 425.601(c)(4) and 425.654(a)(4), calculating the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark by adjusting for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's assigned beneficiary population and the assignable beneficiary population for the ACO's regional service area according to §§ 425.601(a)(8)(i)(C) and 425.656(b)(3), and adjusting the flat dollar amount ACPT for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's BY3 assigned beneficiary population and the national assignable FFS population according to § 425.660(b)(4).

(c) Concerns About Beneficiaries Excluded From the Current Assignment Methodology Based on the Pre-Step Requirement and Definition of an Assignable Beneficiary

CMS has established a goal that 100 percent of beneficiaries enrolled in Original Medicare be involved in a care relationship with accountability for quality and total cost of care by 2030. 152 CMS has also established health equity as a top priority through our CMS Framework for Health Equity (2022-2032). 153 However, CMS believes that the assignment pre-step and definition of assignable beneficiary may create barriers for some beneficiaries otherwise eligible for assignment to be assigned to ACOs. Revising the pre-step and definition of assignable beneficiary thus represents an opportunity to expand the assigned and assignable populations.

152 Seshamani M, Fowler E, Brooks-LaSure C. Building On The CMS Strategic Vision: Working Together For A Stronger Medicare. Health Affairs. January 11, 2022. Available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/forefront.20220110.198444 .

153 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, The CMS Framework for Health Equity 2022-2032 (April 2022), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/cms-framework-health-equity.pdf .

ACOs and other interested parties have also raised concerns that the current pre-step and definition of assignable beneficiary create barriers for some beneficiaries to be assigned to ACOs. For example, in previous proposed rules, we have received input from commenters that the pre-step requirement, as implemented in the current assignment methodology, systematically excludes from assignment beneficiaries who only received primary care from nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and clinical nurse specialists. In response to the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, a commenter noted that the current claims-based assignment methodology creates a barrier for nurse practitioners and their patients to participate in ACOs. 154

154 See comment letter from American Association of Nurse Practitioners, to Chiquita Brooks-LaSure, Administrator, CMS (September 6, 2022), available at https://www.regulations.gov/comment/CMS-2022-0113-21927 .

Additional analysis by CMS has found that expanding the assignment methodology to allow more opportunities for beneficiaries to be assignable based on their receipt of primary care services provided by nurse practitioners, physician assistants, or clinical nurse specialists would reduce the barriers for underserved beneficiaries to be assigned to ACOs. As described in section III.G.3.a.(2)(d) of this proposed rule, we have observed from initial modeling of expanding the definition of an assignable beneficiary that such an approach could add to the national assignable population identified under current Shared Savings Program policies a population of beneficiaries that are more likely to be disabled, be enrolled in the Medicare Part D low-income subsidy (LIS), and reside in areas with higher ADI scores. The newly assignable population of beneficiaries also had a lower average prospective HCC risk score, lower total per capita-year spending, higher hospice utilization, and a higher mortality rate than the national assignable population under the current definition of an assignable beneficiary. Therefore, we believe that adjusting the assignment methodology within the flexibility available under the statute so that additional beneficiaries can be included in the population of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program, and modifying the definition of assignable beneficiary to include a broader population, would make meaningful steps toward greater health equity and align with priorities recently emphasized in our CMS Framework for Health Equity (2022-2032). 155

155 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, The CMS Framework for Health Equity 2022-2032 (April 2022), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/cms-framework-health-equity.pdf .

(2) Proposed Revisions

(a) Overview of Proposed Revisions To Incorporate Use of an Expanded Window for Assignment

Section 1899(c)(1)(A) of the Act requires that claims-based assignment to ACOs be based on beneficiaries' utilization of primary care services furnished by ACO professionals who are physicians. We are proposing to use an expanded window for assignment in a new step three to the claims-based assignment process to identify additional beneficiaries for ACO assignment (described in section III.G.3.a.(2)(b). of this proposed rule), and we are proposing to modify the definition of “assignable beneficiary” to be consistent with this use of an expanded window for assignment to identify additional beneficiaries to include in the assignable population after application of the existing methodology (described in section III.G.3.a.(2)(c). of this proposed rule). We propose to add a new definition of “Expanded window for assignment” in § 425.20 to mean the 24-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO, or to identify assignable beneficiaries, or both that includes the applicable 12-month assignment window (as defined under § 425.20) and the preceding 12 months.

To follow is a brief summary of the proposed uses of the expanded window for assignment, described in greater detail elsewhere within this section of this proposed rule. First, the proposed addition of a step three to the beneficiary assignment methodology would occur after the current steps one and two and would apply only to beneficiaries who do not meet the pre-step requirement but who received at least one primary care service during the proposed expanded window for assignment with an ACO professional who is a primary care physician or a physician who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c). Beneficiaries qualifying for step three would be assigned based on the plurality of allowed charges for primary care services during this expanded window for assignment. Second, the proposed revision to the definition of an assignable beneficiary would similarly include beneficiaries who receive at least one primary care service during the proposed expanded window for assignment from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c). In combination with using the expanded window for assignment for identifying beneficiaries who received at least one primary care service from a primary care physician or a physician whose specialty designation is used in assignment, under both the proposed step three for assignment and proposed revised definition of an assignable beneficiary, we would continue to consider whether beneficiaries received at least one primary care service during the 12-month assignment window. We propose that these changes would be effective for the performance year beginning on January 1, 2025, and subsequent performance years.

A number of factors informed our consideration of the duration of the expanded window for assignment. We believe that a 24-month expanded window for assignment, as opposed to a longer period, would prioritize primary care services that were provided more recently. Through the proposed modifications to the assignment methodology and the definition of assignable beneficiary, we seek to better account for beneficiaries who may be receiving their primary care predominantly from non-physician practitioners during the 12-month assignment window, but who received care from a physician in the preceding 12 months, in recognition of the statutory requirement in section 1899(c) of the Act that claims-based assignment be based on receipt of primary care services from physicians who are ACO professionals. We believe that primary care services furnished by nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and clinical nurse specialists during the 12-month assignment window could reflect their work in clinical teams in collaboration with and under the supervision of physicians, and thereby represent a continuation of the beneficiary's primary care relationship with a physician from the previous year. Furthermore, use of a 24-month expanded window for assignment would build on experience we have gained and lessons learned from testing Medicare ACO initiatives by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (Innovation Center), specifically from the use of a two-year beneficiary alignment period in the ACO Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (REACH) Model and the Next Generation ACO (NGACO) Model. 156

156 See, for example, CMS, Center for Medicare & Medicaid Innovation, ACO Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (REACH) Model, PY2023 Financial Operating Guide: Overview, available at https://innovation.cms.gov/media/document/aco-reach-py2023-financial-op-guide (refer to Appendix B, Beneficiary Alignment Procedures). See also, CMS, Center for Medicare & Medicaid Innovation, Next Generation ACO Model Benchmarking Methods (December 15, 2015), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/files/x/nextgenaco-methodology.pdf (refer to Appendix A, Next Generation ACO Model Alignment Procedures). In summary, under the ACO REACH Model and NGACO Model the alignment period consists of two alignment years. The first alignment year is the 12-month period ending 18 months prior to the start of the relevant performance year or base year. The second alignment year is the 12-month period ending 6 months prior to the start of the relevant performance year or base year.

We also believe it is timely to propose modifications to the definition of “assignment window” under § 425.20 for improved clarity and consistency with the programmatic applications of the assignment window. Under the existing definition, assignment window means the 12-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO. However, under existing Shared Savings Program policies and under the proposed changes described in this section of this proposed rule, we use the term assignment window in referencing our identification of assignable beneficiaries. Therefore, we are proposing to modify the definition of assignment window to mean the 12-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO, or to identify assignable beneficiaries, or both.

We seek comment on proposed modifications to § 425.20, to revise the definition of “assignable beneficiary,” “assignment window,” and add a new definition of “expanded window for assignment”.

(b) Proposed Revisions To Add a Step Three to the Beneficiary Assignment Methodology

For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2025, and subsequent performance years, we propose to revise the step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology, as described in § 425.402, to include a step three, which would utilize the proposed expanded window for assignment to identify additional beneficiaries for assignment among Medicare FFS beneficiaries who were not identified under the existing pre-step. Specifically, step three would identify all such beneficiaries not identified by the pre-step criterion specified in § 425.402(b)(1), who also meet the following criteria:

(1) Received at least one primary care service with a non-physician ACO professional (nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or clinical nurse specialist) in the ACO during the applicable 12-month assignment window.

(2) Received at least one primary care service with a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO and who is a primary care physician as defined under § 425.20 or who has one of the primary specialty designations included in § 425.402(c) during the applicable 24-month expanded window for assignment.

A beneficiary meeting the aforementioned criteria would then be assigned to the ACO if the allowed charges for primary care services furnished to the beneficiary by ACO professionals in the ACO who are primary care physicians, non-physician ACO professionals, or physicians with specialty designations included in § 425.402(c) during the applicable expanded window for assignment are greater than the allowed charges for primary care services furnished by primary care physicians, physicians with specialty designations included in § 425.402(c), nurse practitioners (as defined at § 410.75(b)), physician assistants (as defined at § 410.74(a)(2)), and clinical nurse specialists (as defined at § 410.76(b)) who are ACO professionals in any other ACO or not affiliated with any ACO and identified by a Medicare-enrolled billing TIN.

Further, in order to be assigned to an ACO through the step-wise assignment methodology, a Medicare FFS beneficiary would continue to need to meet the eligibility criteria in § 425.401(a) for the 12-month assignment window, regardless of whether the beneficiary is assigned to an ACO in step one or two, or proposed step three. Under the proposed approach, beneficiaries who do not receive any primary care services during the assignment window would continue to be excluded from claims-based assignment as they are under the current assignment methodology. Beneficiaries who meet the pre-step based on a 12-month assignment window (as specified in § 425.402(b)(1)) but are not assigned to an ACO in steps one or two would also continue to not be assigned to an ACO as these beneficiaries would not be considered for assignment in step three. The proposed changes also would not change beneficiary voluntary alignment, which would continue to supersede claims-based assignment, as specified in § 425.402(e).

As specified in § 425.400(a)(3)(ii), beneficiaries who are prospectively assigned to an ACO will remain assigned to the ACO at the end of the benchmark or performance year, unless they meet any of the exclusion criteria under § 425.401(b). As a result, under claims-based assignment, a beneficiary prospectively assigned to an ACO is not eligible for assignment to a different ACO for the same benchmark or performance year. 157 We propose to continue to apply this approach for beneficiaries prospectively assigned at step one, step two, or proposed step three. In other words, a beneficiary who is assigned to an ACO based on prospective assignment through step one or two or proposed step three would remain assigned to that ACO for the benchmark or performance year (unless they meet any of the exclusion criteria under § 425.401(b)). Under this approach, a beneficiary prospectively assigned to an ACO for a benchmark or performance year would not be assigned to another ACO under prospective assignment or to an ACO under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, even if the other ACO provides the plurality of the beneficiary's primary care services during the relevant benchmark or performance year.

157 See, for example, Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications (version #11, January 2023), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-2 (see section 2.3.2.2, “Prospective Assignment”).

The use of a 24-month expanded window for assignment would also require changes to the timeframe for which we recognize additional primary care service codes related to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency (PHE), as outlined in § 425.400(c)(2). Under § 425.400(c)(2), we use certain additional primary care service codes in determining beneficiary assignment under § 425.400(c)(1) when the assignment window for a benchmark or performance year includes any month(s) during the COVID-19 PHE (as defined in § 400.200). In accordance with § 425.400(c)(2)(ii), the additional primary care service codes are applicable to all months of the assignment window, when the assignment window includes any month(s) during the COVID-19 PHE, with the exception of certain additional CPT codes (99441, 99442, and 99443) which we use in determining assignment until they are longer payable under Medicare FFS payment policies (as specified under § 425.400(c)(2)(i)(A)(2)). We refer readers to discussions in earlier rulemaking for the development of this policy, including 85 FR 84748 through 84755, 85 FR 84791 through 84793, and 86 FR 65276. We propose to modify the regulations at § 425.400(c)(2)(i) and (ii) to incorporate references to the expanded window for assignment, such that we would apply the additional primary care service codes to all months of the assignment window or applicable expanded window for assignment when the assignment window or applicable expanded window for assignment includes any month(s) during the COVID-19 PHE. These proposed changes are necessary to capture the additional codes related to the COVID-19 PHE when using the expanded window for assignment in determining assignment for a benchmark or performance year. 158

158 See, for example, HHS Secretary Xavier Becerra Statement on End of the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency (May 11, 2023), available at https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2023/05/11/hhs-secretary-xavier-becerra-statement-on-end-of-the-covid-19-public-health-emergency.html . See also Letter to U.S. Governors from HHS Secretary Xavier Becerra on renewing COVID-19 Public Health Emergency (PHE), available at https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2023/02/09/letter-us-governors-hhs-secretary-xavier-becerra-renewing-covid-19-public-health-emergency.html (specifying the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services is planning for the COVID-19 PHE to end on May 11, 2023).

The proposed use of an expanded window for assignment in an enhanced step-wise assignment methodology would result in a greater overall number of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs. All beneficiaries who are assigned to an ACO under the current methodology would continue to be assigned to an ACO under the proposed methodology. Under the proposed methodology, a beneficiary who does not meet the current pre-step requirement would also be eligible to be assigned to an ACO if they (a) received at least one primary care service from a nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or clinical nurse specialist who is an ACO professional in the ACO during the applicable assignment window and (b) received at least one primary care service from a primary care physician or physician with a specialty used in assignment who is an ACO professional in the ACO during the applicable expanded window for assignment.

Under proposed changes, the 12-month assignment window would continue to represent the period used to identify allowed charges for primary care services received from ACO professionals and analogous practitioners not participating in an ACO, for purposes of claims-based beneficiary assignment during steps one and two. Thus, most beneficiaries currently assigned to an ACO under the existing assignment methodology would continue to be assigned to the same ACO under the proposed changes. We anticipate that only a very small share of beneficiaries would be assigned to a different ACO under the proposed assignment methodology, and any change in ACO assignment would be due to the operational order in which assignment is run and the precedence of prospective assignment over preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. Specifically, there may be a small share of beneficiaries who would be prospectively assigned to an ACO under the proposed step three for prospective assignment that differs from the retrospective ACO the beneficiary is currently assigned to under steps one or two for preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. This precedence of prospective assignment follows the current assignment methodology, which currently assigns beneficiaries via steps one and two of prospective assignment to an ACO that may be different than the ACO to which the beneficiary would have been assigned via steps one or two if assigned to an ACO under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. For the average retrospective ACO, the share of assigned beneficiaries affected by this precedence of prospective assignment has historically been very small, approximately 1.3 percent from 2018 through 2021.

The proposed addition of step three would add a population of otherwise omitted beneficiaries by using the expanded window for assignment to identify the required physician visit with an ACO professional and to determine the plurality of allowed charges for primary care services. Functionally, the beneficiaries who would be newly assigned are beneficiaries who received a primary care service from an ACO professional who is a primary care physician (as defined under § 425.20) or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c) in the 12-month period prior to the assignment window and received a primary care service from a nurse practitioner (as defined at § 410.75(b)), a physician assistant (as defined at § 410.74(a)(2)), or a clinical nurse specialist (as defined at § 410.76(b)) during the assignment window. Notably, the proposed step 3 would continue to be consistent with section 1899(c)(1)(A) of the Act, because a beneficiary would have to have received a primary care service from a primary care physician or physician with a specialty used in assignment who is an ACO professional in the ACO during the expanded window for assignment to be eligible for assignment to the ACO.

Similar to any other change that affects beneficiary assignment, the proposed use of an expanded window for assignment in a step three could impact downstream aspects of the Shared Savings Program that rely on the assigned population, including the following potential effects:

• Larger populations of assigned beneficiaries could contribute to more ACOs meeting minimum size requirements to participate in the program.

• A larger assigned population would result in lower minimum savings rates for ACOs subject to a variable minimum savings rate (that is, ACOs in a one-sided risk model on the BASIC track's glide path or ACOs in a two-sided risk model that elected a variable minimum savings rate). Lower minimum savings rates reflect a lower threshold for ACOs to meet in order to share in savings. Similarly, a larger assigned population would result in a lower minimum loss rate for ACOs in a two-sided risk model with a variable minimum loss rate, which reflects a lower threshold for two-sided risk ACOs to meet before they must share in losses.

• A larger assigned population would enable higher performance payment limits, which are based on a percentage of an ACO's total benchmark expenditures. As an ACO's assigned beneficiary population increases, so too do the ACO's total benchmark expenditures. Because the maximum shared savings an ACO can earn is determined as a percentage of total benchmark expenditures, a larger assigned population would result in a higher performance payment limit. Similarly, a larger assigned population would result in larger loss sharing limit for ACOs in two-sided risk models because loss sharing limits are also determined as a percentage of aggregate benchmarks.

• A larger assigned population could affect an ACO's revenue status as the ACO's ACO participants' total Medicare Parts A and B fee-for-service (FFS) revenue would not change but the ACO's assigned beneficiary population's total Medicare Parts A and B FFS expenditures would increase. In other words, revenue-to-expenditure ratios would decrease for ACOs that receive a larger assigned beneficiary population. Compared to the current assignment methodology, the proposed assignment methodology change could result in some ACOs being identified as low revenue instead of high revenue. As a result, other program elements tied to revenue status could then be affected by the proposed changes, specifically an ACO's eligibility for Advance Investment Payments.

• Changes in the assigned population could directly affect ACOs' average risk scores, mix of beneficiaries across enrollment types, regional service area, and total expenditures during benchmark and performance years.

Expected impacts on several other program elements would depend on differences in the changes observed for beneficiaries added to the assignable population versus beneficiaries added to the ACO's assigned beneficiaries. For example, the impact of the proposed change to the assignment methodology on ACO performance would depend in part on the difference in spending levels and trends between those beneficiaries added to the assignable population, nationally and within an ACO's regional service area, versus those beneficiaries added to the ACO's assigned beneficiary population. The data shared with ACOs on their assignable and assigned beneficiaries would change under the proposed policy as the population of assignable and assigned beneficiaries changes.

We propose modifications to subpart E of the Shared Savings Program regulations to specify the revised beneficiary assignment methodology. We propose to specify the new step three in a new provision at § 425.402(b)(5). We also propose technical and conforming changes to incorporate the revised methodology. We propose to amend § 425.402(b)(1), describing the existing pre-step of the assignment methodology that would remain applicable for step one and step two, to refer to the identification of all beneficiaries who had “at least one primary care service during the applicable assignment window with a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO and who is a primary care physician as defined under § 425.20 or who has one of the primary specialty designations included in [§ 425.402(c)]” (emphasis added to reflect revised text). In § 425.402(c), which indicates the primary specialty designations used in assignment, we propose to specify that the listed specialties would be considered for ACO professionals in step two (as described in § 425.402(b)(4)) and the proposed step three (which would become a new provision at § 425.402(b)(5)) of the assignment methodology. In § 425.400(a)(2)(ii), which generally describes quarterly updates to preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, we propose to specify that assignment would be updated quarterly based on the most recent 12 or 24 months of data, as applicable, under the methodology described in §§ 425.402 and 425.404. Lastly, in § 425.400(a)(3)(i), which generally describes prospective assignment of beneficiaries to ACOs at the beginning of each benchmark or performance year, we propose to amend the reference that specifies that we base prospective assignment on the beneficiary's use of primary care services in the most recent 12 months for which data are available, to specify instead the beneficiary's use of primary care services in the most recent 12 months or 24 months, as applicable, for which data are available, using the assignment methodology described in §§ 425.402 and 425.404.

(c) Proposed Revisions to the Definition of an Assignable Beneficiary

Consistent with the previously described proposal to use an expanded window for assignment in an enhanced step-wise assignment methodology, we are proposing to revise the definition of Assignable beneficiary in § 425.20 to include additional beneficiaries who would be identified using the expanded window for assignment. Under this proposal, we would continue to utilize the criterion in the existing definition, under which assignable beneficiary means a Medicare FFS beneficiary who receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 12-month assignment window from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c). Further, for the performance year beginning January 1, 2025 and subsequent performance years, we propose that a Medicare fee-for-service beneficiary who does not meet this requirement but who meets both of the following criteria would also be considered an assignable beneficiary:

• Receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 24-month expanded window for assignment from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c).

• Receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 12-month assignment window from a Medicare-enrolled practitioner who is a nurse practitioner (as defined at § 410.75(b)), physician assistant (as defined at § 410.74(a)(2)), or a clinical nurse specialist (as defined at § 410.76(b)).

The proposed use of an expanded window for assignment would result in a greater number of beneficiaries included in the assignable population. All beneficiaries who are currently assignable would continue to be assignable under the proposed revisions to the definition of an assignable beneficiary. Under the proposed definition, beneficiaries who do not receive any primary care services during the assignment window would continue to be excluded from the population of assignable beneficiaries, just as they are excluded in the current definition of an assignable beneficiary. In other words, the 12-month assignment window would continue to represent the timeframe within which beneficiaries must receive at least one primary care service to be identified as an assignable beneficiary. Moreover, to identify a broader assignable population under this proposed approach, we believe it is important to consider the criterion for the beneficiary to have received a primary care service during the 12-month assignment window to be met through a service furnished from a non-physician practitioner (nurse practitioner, physician assistant, and clinical nurse specialist), or from a primary care physician or a physician who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c) (as is required under the current definition).

The proposed approach to expanding the assignable beneficiary population could impact downstream aspects of the Shared Savings Program that rely on the assignable population, including the following effects:

• Changes in the distribution of expenditures among the national assignable population could affect the thresholds used to truncate expenditures.

• Changes in average per capita expenditures and risk scores among assignable beneficiaries in a given benchmark year could affect the average risk-adjusted spending within ACOs' regional service areas, which could affect regional adjustments.

• Differential changes in average per capita expenditures and risk scores over time could affect trend and update factors that are based on changes in expenditures for the national assignable population and in the risk-adjusted expenditures for the population of assignable beneficiaries in an ACO's regional service area.

• Changes in average prospective HCC risk scores for the national assignable population could affect the factors used to renormalize risk scores each benchmark and performance year and to risk-adjust the flat-dollar ACPT amounts.

• Changes in the number of assignable beneficiaries across ACO regional service areas could affect ACOs' market shares, which determine the weights used for blending the national and regional benchmark trend and update factors.

• Changes in the level of national fee-for-service expenditures for the assignable population could affect the caps applied to the regional adjustment and prior savings adjustment to the historical benchmark and the calculation of the flat-dollar ACPT amount.

Under the current regulations, the time period we use to identify the assignable population that will be used to calculate different factors used in program financial calculations depends on whether it is a national or regional factor, the start date of an ACO's agreement period and, in some cases, an ACO's selected assignment methodology. Under the proposed revised definition of assignable beneficiary, for all ACOs (regardless of agreement period start date), for the performance year beginning on January 1, 2025, and subsequent performance years, for benchmark year and performance year factors based on the national assignable population, we would identify the assignable population using the 24-month expanded window for assignment comprised of the 12-month calendar year assignment window, which aligns with the assignment window for preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, and the preceding 12 months. We note that under this proposal we would also use the 24-month expanded window for assignment comprised of the 12-month calendar year assignment window and the preceding 12 months when identifying the assignable population for regional factors for performance year 2025 and subsequent years for use in calculations for ACOs that are continuing in agreement periods that began before January 1, 2024.

For ACOs participating in agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, for performance year 2025 and in subsequent years for regional factors, we would identify the assignable population using the 24-month expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii). That is, for ACOs selecting preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, we would use the 24-month expanded window for assignment comprised of the 12-month calendar year assignment window and the preceding 12 months. For ACOs selecting prospective assignment, the 24-month expanded window for assignment would be comprised of the 12-month, offset assignment window plus the preceding 12 months. For example, we would use October 1, 2022, to September 30, 2024, as the 24-month expanded window for assignment to identify the assignable population for performance year 2025 for ACOs under prospective assignment.

We propose technical and conforming changes to provisions in subpart G of the Shared Savings Program regulations that refer to the assignment window used to identify the assignable beneficiary population in order to incorporate references to the proposed approach to using an expanded window for assignment in identifying the assignable population for performance year 2025 and in subsequent years. The regulations establishing the benchmarking methodology for ACOs with agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, do not directly reference the assignment window, and thus would not require conforming changes. However, there are benchmarking methodology provisions for ACOs with agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years that directly refer to the assignment window. Thus, we propose to amend these provisions to specify that the assignable population would be identified for the relevant benchmark year or the performance year (as applicable) using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii):

• In §§ 425.652(a)(5)(v)(A) and (b)(2)(iv)(A), provisions on calculating the county-level share of assignable beneficiaries who are assigned to the ACO for each county in the ACO's regional service area for purposes of calculating the blended national-regional growth rates used in trending and updating the benchmark (respectively).

• In the provision on redetermination of the regional adjustment for the second or each subsequent performance year during the term of the agreement period in § 425.652(a)(9)(ii).

• In the provision on the calculation of average county FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries in each county in the ACO's regional service area in § 425.654(a)(1)(i).

• In the provision on adjusting for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for BY3 and the assignable beneficiary population for the ACO's regional service area for BY3, in calculating average per capita expenditures for the ACO's regional service area, in § 425.656(b)(3).

Similarly, we also propose to specify in the proposed new provision at § 425.655(b)(1) that the assignable population that would be used to calculate average county prospective HCC and demographic risk scores for purposes of calculating the proposed regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor (refer to section III.G.4.b. of this proposed rule) would be identified for the relevant benchmark year or the performance year (as applicable) using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

We seek comment on our proposed modifications to the definition of assignable beneficiary in § 425.20. We also seek comment on our proposed technical and conforming changes to references to the identification of assignable beneficiaries in subpart G of the Shared Savings Program regulations, as well as in the proposed new regulation at § 425.655 (on calculating the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor), to incorporate the use of the assignment window or expanded window for assignment in identification of the assignable beneficiary population.

(d) Simulations To Understand the Potential Effect of Proposed Changes

To understand the potential impact of using an expanded window for assignment in a proposed step 3 of the claims-based assignment methodology, we simulated using the proposed definition for an assignable beneficiary and proposed step 3 using the set of ACOs and data for performance year (PY) 2021. To simplify the analysis, this simulation used CY 2021 as the assignment window. Thus, the expanded window for assignment spanned from January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2021. We used a calendar year basis because we do not expect the impact of the proposed changes to meaningfully differ between retrospective and prospective assignment windows, the latter of which uses an offset window. In this analysis, the national assignable population included a total of 26.2 million beneficiaries based on the current methodology. The simulation applying the proposed policies then added 762,156 newly assignable beneficiaries, growing the national assignable population by about 2.9 percent. For additional analysis on estimated impacts, we also refer commenters to the Regulatory Impact Analysis in section VII.E. of this proposed rule. We seek comment on the proposed approach discussed in this proposed rule and the potential effects of the proposed approach, including its effects modeled in the aforementioned simulation and its effects in other scenarios that might be considered by commenters. We anticipate continuing additional simulations on the effect of the proposed changes to the assignment methodology to further inform our understanding of the potential impacts of the proposal, and we are planning to publish results from such additional simulations in the final rule.

Simulation results suggest that an expanded window for assignment may increase access to accountable care for underserved beneficiaries. Relative to the national assignable population as determined under the current assignment methodology, the group of added beneficiaries from the expanded window for assignment simulation had a larger share of beneficiaries with disabled Medicare enrollment type, resided in areas with slightly higher average Area Deprivation Index (ADI) national percentile rank (a measure of neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage), and had a larger share with any months of Medicare Part D LIS enrollment (refer to Table 30).

Simulation results also suggest that using a 24-month expanded window for assignment in proposed step 3 of the claims-based assignment methodology would increase access to accountable care among beneficiaries with Medicare coverage for part of a year (such as beneficiaries who die during the performance year). The group of added assignable beneficiaries in the simulation previously described had a lower average prospective HCC risk score, lower total per capita spending in CY 2021, higher hospice utilization, and a higher mortality rate when compared to assignable beneficiaries determined using the current definition of assignable beneficiary and assignment methodology. These results suggest that beneficiaries who would be added to the assignable population under the proposed changes may benefit from greater care coordination through ACOs.

(e) Implementation of Proposed Revisions

We are proposing that the expanded window for assignment and revised step-wise assignment methodology would be applicable to all ACOs for the performance year beginning on January 1, 2025, and in subsequent years. For example, for a calendar year assignment window that runs from January 1, 2025, through December 31, 2025, the expanded window for assignment would run from January 1, 2024, through December 31, 2025. For an offset assignment window that runs from October 1, 2023, through September 30, 2024, the expanded window for assignment would run from October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2024. Consistent with how we have implemented previous changes to the Shared Savings Program assignment methodology, we would use the new methodology each time assignment is determined for a given benchmark or performance year and, as applicable, to determine the eligibility of ACOs applying to enter into or renew participation in the Shared Savings Program. For example, applicant eligibility for PY 2024 will be determined during CY 2023. We would not be able to review public comments and decide whether to finalize the proposed changes in sufficient time to apply the expanded window for assignment and revised methodology for PY 2024 applications. Additionally, we anticipate that the proposed revised approach, if finalized, would require significant operational changes to the Shared Savings Program assignment methodology, which would take time to prepare in advance of initial use of the approach during the application process. For these reasons, we would not be able to apply the expanded window for assignment and revised step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology for the performance year starting on January 1, 2024, and we are proposing to apply this change beginning with the performance year starting on January 1, 2025.

We would apply the proposed revised approach to determining beneficiary assignment and the revised definition of assignable beneficiary in establishing, adjusting, updating, and resetting historical benchmarks for ACOs entering new agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2025, and subsequent years. Also consistent with how we have implemented previous changes to the assignment methodology, we would adjust benchmarks for all ACOs in agreement periods for which performance year 2025 is a second or subsequent performance year at the start of performance year 2025, so that the ACO benchmarks reflect the use of the same assignment rules and definition of assignable beneficiary as would apply in the performance year (refer to §§ 425.601(a)(9) and 425.652(a)(9)). We believe that the expanded window for assignment and proposed step three represent a valuable change that would fill an important gap in the current assignment methodology. CMS has outlined a renewed vision and strategy for driving health system transformation to achieve equitable outcomes through high-quality, affordable, person-centered care for all beneficiaries. 159 In a January 2022 article, CMS stated our goal that 100 percent of people with Original Medicare will be in a care relationship with accountability for quality and total cost of care by 2030. 160 Many Medicare FFS beneficiaries are currently excluded from the assignable and Shared Savings Program assigned populations despite receiving primary care from ACO professional nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and clinical nurse specialists during the existing 12-month assignment window, and these excluded beneficiaries tend to come from populations characterized by greater social risk factors. Specifically, beneficiaries likely to be added to the assignable population are more likely to be disabled, be enrolled in the Medicare Part D LIS, and reside in areas with higher ADI scores (as described in section III.G.3.a.(2)(d) of this proposed rule). The proposed change to the assignment methodology represents an opportunity to not only grow the share of Medicare beneficiaries involved in accountable care relationships but to also support efforts to improve health equity in the Medicare program.

159 See, for example, CMS Innovation Center “Strategic Direction” web page, at https://innovation.cms.gov/strategic-direction . See also, CMS, Innovation Center Strategy Refresh, available at https://innovation.cms.gov/strategic-direction-whitepaper .

160 Seshamani M, Fowler E, Brooks-LaSure C. Building On The CMS Strategic Vision: Working Together For A Stronger Medicare. Health Affairs. January 11, 2022. Available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/forefront.20220110.198444 .

In summary, we seek comment on the proposed changes to establish a new defined term in § 425.20, expanded window for assignment, for use in a proposed additional step three in the beneficiary assignment methodology and in identifying the assignable beneficiary population, revisions to the definition of assignable beneficiary, as well as proposed technical and conforming changes to provisions of the Shared Savings Program regulations, including the definition of assignment window under § 425.20, and provisions within subpart E and subpart G. If finalized, the proposed changes would be applicable for the performance year beginning on January 1, 2025, and subsequent performance years. We welcome comments on any aspects of the proposed changes, including the length of the expanded window for assignment. We also seek comment on additional policies that CMS should consider for potential future rulemaking on our assignment methodology, with the goal of increasing the number of Original Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries assigned to an ACO, particularly in underserved communities.

b. Proposed Revisions to the Definition of Primary Care Services Used in Shared Savings Program Beneficiary Assignment

(1) Background

Section 1899(c)(1) of the Act, as amended by the CURES Act and the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, provides that for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2019, the Secretary shall assign beneficiaries to an ACO based on their utilization of primary care services provided by a physician who is an ACO professional and all services furnished by Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs). However, the statute does not specify a list of services considered to be primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67853), we established the initial list of services, identified by Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) and Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) codes, that we considered to be primary care services. In that final rule, we indicated that we intended to monitor CPT and HCPCS codes and would consider making changes to the definition of primary care services to add or delete codes used to identify primary care services if there were sufficient evidence that revisions were warranted. We have updated the list of primary care service codes in subsequent rulemaking (refer to 80 FR 32746 through 32748; 80 FR 71270 through 71273; 82 FR 53212 and 53213; 83 FR 59964 through 59968; 85 FR 27582 through 27586; 85 FR 84747 through 84756; 85 FR 84785 through 84793; 86 FR 65273 through 65279; 87 FR 69821 through 69825) to reflect additions or modifications to the codes that have been recognized for payment under the PFS and to incorporate other changes to the definition of primary care services for purposes of the Shared Savings Program.

For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years, we defined primary care services in § 425.400(c)(1)(vii) for purposes of assigning beneficiaries to ACOs under § 425.402 as the set of services identified by the following HCPCS/CPT codes:

• CPT codes:

++ 96160 and 96161 (codes for administration of health risk assessment).

++ 99201 through 99215 (codes for office or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of a patient).

++ 99304 through 99318 (codes for professional services furnished in a nursing facility; professional services or services reported on an FQHC or RHC claim identified by these codes are excluded when furnished in a SNF).

++ 99319 through 99340 (codes for patient domiciliary, rest home, or custodial care visit).

++ 99341 through 99350 (codes for evaluation and management services furnished in a patient's home).

++ 99354 and 99355 (add-on codes, for prolonged evaluation and management or psychotherapy services beyond the typical service time of the primary procedure; when the base code is also a primary care service code under this paragraph (c)(1)(vi)).

++ 99421, 99422, and 99423 (codes for online digital evaluation and management).

++ 99424, 99425, 99426, and 99427 (codes for principal care management services).

++ 99437, 99487, 99489, 99490 and 99491 (codes for chronic care management).

++ 99439 (code for non-complex chronic care management).

++ 99483 (code for assessment of and care planning for patients with cognitive impairment).

++ 99484, 99492, 99493 and 99494 (codes for behavioral health integration services).

++ 99495 and 99496 (codes for transitional care management services).

++ 99497 and 99498 (codes for advance care planning; services identified by these codes furnished in an inpatient setting are excluded).

• HCPCS codes:

++ G0402 (code for the Welcome to Medicare visit).

++ G0438 and G0439 (codes for the annual wellness visits).

++ G0442 (code for alcohol misuse screening service).

++ G0443 (code for alcohol misuse counseling service).

++ G0444 (code for annual depression screening service).

++ G0463 (code for services furnished in ETA hospitals).

++ G0506 (code for chronic care management).

++ G2010 (code for the remote evaluation of patient video/images).

++ G2012 and G2252 (codes for virtual check-in).

++ G2058 (code for non-complex chronic care management).

++ G2064 and G2065 (codes for principal care management services).

++ G0317, G0318, and G2212 (code for prolonged office or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of a patient).

++ G2214 (code for psychiatric collaborative care model).

++ G3002 and G3003 (codes for chronic pain management).

• Primary care service codes include any CPT code identified by CMS that directly replaces a CPT code specified in paragraph (c)(1)(vi)(A) of § 425.400 or a HCPCS code specified in paragraph (c)(1)(vi)(B) of § 425.400, when the assignment window (as defined in § 425.20) for a benchmark or performance year includes any day on or after the effective date of the replacement code for payment purposes under FFS Medicare.

(2) Proposed Revisions

Based on feedback from ACOs and our further review of the HCPCS and CPT codes that are currently recognized for payment under the PFS or that we are proposing to recognize for payment starting in CY 2024, we believe it would be appropriate to amend the definition of primary care services used in the Shared Savings Program assignment methodology to include certain additional codes and to make other technical changes to the definition of primary care services for use in determining beneficiary assignment for the performance year starting on January 1, 2024, and subsequent performance years, in order to remain consistent with billing and coding under the PFS.

We propose to revise the definition of primary care services used for assignment in the Shared Savings Program regulations to include the following additions: (1) Smoking and Tobacco-use Cessation Counseling Services CPT codes 99406 and 99407; (2) Remote Physiologic Monitoring CPT codes 99457 and 99458; (3) Cervical or Vaginal Cancer Screening HCPCS code G0101; (4) Office-Based Opioid Use Disorder Services HCPCS codes G2086, G2087, and G2088; (5) Complex Evaluation and Management Services Add-on HCPCS code G2211, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy; (6) Community Health Integration services HCPCS codes GXXX1 and GXXX2, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy; (7) Principal Illness Navigation (PIN) services HCPCS codes GXXX3 and GXXX4, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy; (8) SDOH Risk Assessment HCPCS code GXXX5, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy; (9) Caregiver Behavior Management Training CPT Codes 96202 and 96203, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy; and (10) Caregiver Training Services CPT codes 9X015, 9X016, and 9X017, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy. The following provides additional information about the HCPCS codes that we are proposing to add to the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment:

• Smoking and tobacco-use cessation counseling services CPT codes 99406 and 99407: Effective January 1, 2008, CPT codes 99406 ( Smoking and tobacco-use cessation counseling visit; intermediate, greater than 3 minutes up to 10 minutes ) and 99407 ( Smoking and tobacco-use cessation counseling visit; intensive, greater than 10 minutes ) were implemented for billing for smoking and tobacco-use cessation counseling services. As described in Medicare National Coverage Determinations (NCD) Manual, Publication 100-3, chapter 1, section 210.4.1, tobacco use remains the leading cause of preventable morbidity and mortality in the U.S. and is a major contributor to the nation's increasing medical costs. Despite the growing list of adverse health effects associated with smoking, more than 45 million U.S. adults continue to smoke and approximately 1,200 die prematurely each day from tobacco-related diseases. Since these are recognized as preventive services, 161 similar to other preventive services such as alcohol misuse screening and counseling (HCPCS codes G0442 and G0443) which are currently included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we believe it appropriate to include CPT codes that identify counseling to prevent tobacco use in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

161 Medicare Learning Network (MLN006559, May 2023) Medicare Preventive Services Quick Reference Chart, available at: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prevention/PrevntionGenInfo/medicare-preventive-services/MPS-QuickReferenceChart-1.html#TOBACCO.

• Remote Physiologic Monitoring CPT codes 99457 and 99458: Chronic care remote physiologic monitoring (RPM) services involve the collection, analysis, and interpretation of digitally collected physiologic data, followed by the development of a treatment plan, and the managing of a patient under the treatment plan. In the CY 2020 PFS final rule (84 FR 62697) we finalized a revised CPT code 99457 ( Remote physiologic monitoring treatment management services, clinical staff/physician/other qualified health care professional time in a calendar month requiring interactive communication with the patient/caregiver during the month; initial 20 minutes ) and added CPT code 99458 ( Remote physiologic monitoring treatment management services, clinical staff/physician/other qualified health care professional time in a calendar month requiring interactive communication with the patient/caregiver during the month; additional 20 minutes ) to adopt the CPT Editorial Panel revised structure for CPT code 99457. The new code structure retained CPT code 99457 as a base code that describes the first 20 minutes of the treatment management services, and uses a new add-on code to describe subsequent 20-minute intervals of the service. We further designated CPT codes 99457 and 99458 as care management services because care management services include establishing, implementing, revising, or monitoring treatment plans, as well as providing support services, and because RPM services include establishing, implementing, revising, and monitoring a specific treatment plan for a patient related to one or more chronic conditions that are monitored remotely. Because these remote therapeutic monitoring services are designated as care management services 162 and because we broadly include care management services (for example, CPT codes 99437, 99487, 99489, 99490 and 99491) in the Shared Savings Program definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we believe CPT codes 99457 and 99458 should also be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

162 Medicare Physician Fee Schedule Care Management Services Information, available at: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/PhysicianFeeSched/Care-Management.

• Cervical or Vaginal Cancer Screening Code HCPCS code G0101: Section 4102 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 provides for coverage of screening pelvic examinations (including a clinical breast examination) for all female beneficiaries, subject to certain frequency and other limitations. 163 Cervical and vaginal cancer screening and clinical breast examination are important preventive health care services intended to detect early cancer, precancers and sexually transmitted infections. HCPCS code G0101 ( Cervical or vaginal cancer screening; pelvic and clinical breast examination ) can be reimbursed by Medicare Part B every 2 years. For patients who are considered high risk, it is allowed on an annual basis. Obstetrics/gynecology and gynecology/oncology are identified as physician specialty designations for purposes of identifying primary care services furnished to beneficiaries used in assignment operations according to § 425.402(c), so we believe it appropriate to use wellness and preventive care visits provided by these specialists in our definition of primary care services used in assignment. CMS considers these to be a preventive health service that can be provided in a primary care setting 164 similar to the annual wellness visit HCPCS codes G0438 and G0439, which are already included in the Shared Savings Program definition of primary care services used in assignment, so we believe that they should be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

163 Medicare National Coverage Determination for Screening Pap Smears and Pelvic Examinations for Early Detection of Cervical or Vaginal Cancers (Pub. No. 100-3, Manual Section 210.2), available at: https://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/view/ncd.aspx?NCDId=185#:~:text=Section%204102%20of%20the%20Balanced%20Budget%20Act%20of,beneficiaries%2C%20subject%20to%20certain%20frequency%20and%20other%20limitations.

164 Medicare Learning Network (MLN006559, May 2023) Medicare Preventive Services Quick Reference Chart, available at: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prevention/PrevntionGenInfo/medicare-preventive-services/MPS-QuickReferenceChart-1.html#PELVIC.

• Office-Based Opioid Use Disorder Services HCPCS Codes G2086, G2087, and G2088: In the CY 2020 PFS final rule (84 FR 62568) we finalized our proposal to establish bundled payments for the overall treatment of Opioid Use Disorder (OUD), including management, care coordination, psychotherapy, and counseling activities HCPCS codes G2086 ( Office-based treatment for opioid use disorder, including development of the treatment plan, care coordination, individual therapy and group therapy and counseling; at least 70 minutes in the first calendar month ), G2087 ( Office-based treatment for opioid use disorder, including care coordination, individual therapy and group therapy and counseling; at least 60 minutes in a subsequent calendar month ), and G2088 ( Office-based treatment for opioid use disorder, including care coordination, individual therapy and group therapy and counseling; each additional 30 minutes beyond the first 120 minutes (List separately in addition to code for primary procedure) ). Refer to the CY 2020 PFS final rule (84 FR 62673) for detailed, technical discussion regarding the description, payment and utilization of these HCPCS codes.

The bundled payment under the PFS for office-based treatment for OUD was intended to create an avenue for physicians and other health professionals to bill for a bundle of services that is similar to the bundled OUD treatment services benefit, but not furnished by an Opioid Treatment Program (OTP). By creating a separate bundled payment for these services under the PFS, we hoped to incentivize increased provision of counseling and care coordination for patients with OUD in the office setting, thereby expanding access to OUD care. We note that use of these codes is limited to only beneficiaries diagnosed with OUD and these codes should not be billed for beneficiaries who are receiving treatment at an OTP, as we believe that would be duplicative since the bundled payments made to OTPs cover similar services for the treatment of OUD.

Because the separately reportable initiating visit requirement for the OUD bundle HCPCS codes G2086, G2087 and G2088 is similar to the separately reportable initiating visit requirements for chronic care management (CCM) services, and behavioral health integration services (BHI), as they include overall management and care coordination activities, we believe these services should be considered primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment. 165 Additionally, we anticipate that the billing clinician, likely an addiction medicine specialist, would manage the patient's overall OUD care, as well as supervise any other individuals participating in the treatment, such as those billing incident to services of the billing physician or other practitioner, which is similar to the requirements related to the furnishing of psychiatric collaborative care model (CoCM) services. CCM, BHI, CoCM, and alcohol misuse screening and counseling services are included in our definition of primary care services, so we believe that HCPCS codes G2086, G2087 and G2088 are appropriate to be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment. For additional clarity, incident to services are services rendered to a patient by a provider other than the physician treating the patient more broadly, that are an integral, although incidental, part of the patient's normal course of diagnosis or treatment of an injury or illness. These services are billed as Medicare Part B services, as if the original physician personally provided the care using that physician's NPI number. We anticipate that these services would often be billed by addiction specialty practitioners but note that these codes are not limited to use by any particular physician or non-physician practitioner specialty. Further, since addiction medicine is identified as one of the physician specialty designations for purposes of identifying primary care services used in assignment operations according to § 425.402(c)(13), we believe it would be appropriate to include care coordination services provided by these specialists in our definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

165 Medicare Physician Fee Schedule Office-Based Opioid Use Disorder (OUD) Treatment Billing Information, available at: https://www.cms.gov/medicare/physician-fee-schedule/office-based-opioid-use-disorder-oud-treatment-billing.

We further recognize that OUD bundle HCPCS codes G2086, G2087 and G2088 are identified as codes for alcohol and substance abuse-related diagnoses that are excluded from Shared Savings Program Claim and Claim Line Feeds. Given this, we want to make transparent that ACOs will not be able to see the claims that may have been used in assignment for beneficiaries receiving OUD services, and possibly not be able to identify why certain beneficiaries were assigned to their ACO related to these codes.

• Complex Evaluation and Management Services Add-on HCPCS Code G2211, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy: As discussed in section II.F. of this proposed rule, HCPCS add-on code G2211 ( Visit complexity inherent to evaluation and management associated with medical care services that serve as the continuing focal point for all needed health care services and/or with medical care services that are part of ongoing care related to a patient's single, serious condition or a complex condition. (Add-on code, list separately in addition to office/outpatient evaluation and management visit, new or established) ) can be reported in conjunction with office/outpatient (O/O) evaluation and management (E/M) visits to better account for additional resources associated with primary care, or similarly ongoing medical care related to a patient's single, serious condition, or complex condition (84 FR 62854 through 62856, 85 FR 84571). Section 113 of Division CC of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (Pub. L. 116-260, December 27, 2020) imposed a moratorium on Medicare payment for this service by prohibiting CMS from making payment under the PFS for inherently complex E/M visits described by HCPCS code G2211 (or any successor or substantially similar code) before January 1, 2024. The moratorium on Medicare payment under the PFS for HCPCS code G2211 will end on December 31, 2023, therefore we are proposing to make HCPCS code G2211 separately payable effective January 1, 2024. Refer to section II.F. of this proposed rule for detailed, technical discussion regarding the description, payment, and utilization of these HCPCS codes.

Since G2211 is an add on code used in conjunction with O/O E/M services and such services are included in our definition of primary care services, we believe that the proposed inclusion of HCPCS code G2211 is consistent with our intent to encompass primary care and wellness services in the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

• Community Health Integration Services HCPCS Codes GXXX1 and GXXX2, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policies: In section II.E. of this proposed rule, separate coding, payment, service elements and documentation requirements for the following Community Health Integration (CHI) services are being proposed:

GXXX1—Community health integration (CHI) services performed by certified or trained auxiliary personnel including a community health worker, under the direction of a physician or other practitioner; 60 minutes per calendar month, in the following activities to address social determinants of health (SDOH) need(s) that are significantly limiting ability to diagnose or treat problem(s) addressed in an initiating E/M visit:

• Person-centered assessment, performed to better understand the individualized context of the intersection between the SDOH need(s) and problem(s) addressed in the initiating E/M visit.

++ Conducting a person-centered assessment to understand patient's life story, strengths, needs, goals, preferences and desired outcomes, including understanding cultural and linguistic factors.

++ Facilitating patient-driven goal-setting and establishing an action plan.

++ Providing tailored support to the patient as needed to accomplish the practitioner's treatment plan.

• Practitioner, Home, and Community-Based Care Coordination:

++ Coordination with practitioner; home, and community-based service providers; and caregiver (if applicable).

++ Communication with practitioners, home- and community-based service providers, hospitals, and skilled nursing facilities (or other health care facilities) regarding the patient's psychosocial strengths and needs, functional deficits, goals, preferences, and desired outcomes, including cultural and linguistic factors.

++ Coordination of care transitions between and among health care practitioners and settings, including transitions involving referrals to other clinicians; follow-up after an emergency department visit; or follow-up after discharges from hospitals, skilled nursing facilities or other health care facilities.

++ Facilitating access to community-based social services (e.g., housing, utilities, transportation, food assistance) to address SDOH need(s).

• Health education—Helping the patient contextualize health education provided by the patient's treatment team with the patient's individual needs, goals, and preferences, in the context of the SDOH need(s), and educating the patient on how to best participate in medical decision-making.

• Building patient self-advocacy skills, so that the patient can interact with members of the health care team and related community-based services addressing the SDOH need(s), in ways that are more likely to promote personalized and effective diagnosis and treatment.

• Health care access/health system navigation:

++ Helping the patient access care, including identifying appropriate practitioners or providers for clinical care and helping secure appointments with them.

• Facilitating behavioral change as necessary for meeting diagnosis and treatment goals, including promoting patient motivation to participate in care and reach person-centered diagnosis or treatment goals.

• Facilitating and providing social and emotional support to help the patient cope with the problem(s) addressed in the initiating visit, the SDOH need(s), and adjust daily routines to better meet diagnosis and treatment goals.

GXXX2—Community health integration services, each additional 30 minutes per calendar month (List separately in addition to GXXX1).

As proposed in section II.E. of this proposed rule, all auxiliary personnel who provide CHI services must be certified or trained to perform all included service elements and authorized to perform them under applicable State laws and regulations. Under § 410.26(a)(1) of our regulations, auxiliary personnel must meet any applicable requirements to provide incident to services, including licensure, imposed by the State in which the services are being furnished. 166 A billing practitioner may arrange to have CHI services provided by auxiliary personnel external to, and under contract with, the practitioner or their practice, such as through a community-based organization (CBO) that employs CHWs, if all of the “incident to” and other requirements and conditions for payment of CHI services are met. The payment policy proposal explains that we would expect the auxiliary personnel performing the CHI services to communicate regularly with the billing practitioner to ensure that CHI services are appropriately documented in the medical record, and to continue to involve the billing practitioner in evaluating the continuing need for CHI services to address the SDOH need(s) that limit the practitioner's ability to diagnose and treat the problem(s) addressed in the initiating visit. Refer to section II.E. of this proposed rule for detailed, technical discussion regarding the proposed description, payment and utilization of these HCPCS codes.

166 CHW Roles As Outlined In The C3 Project available at: https://chwtraining.org/c3-project-chw-skills/.

Since the proposal described in section II.E. of this proposed rule proposes to designate CHI services as care management services that may be furnished under general supervision under § 410.26(b)(5) and because we broadly include care management services in the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we believe it would be similarly appropriate to include CHI services in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment. Additionally, since CHI services require an initiating E/M visit and these services can be billed as incident to by the billing practitioner who bills for the CHI initiating E/M visit, and E/M services are currently included in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we believe it would be similarly appropriate to include CHI services in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

• Principal Illness Navigation (PIN) Services HCPCS codes GXXX3 and GXXX4, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policies: In section II.E. of this proposed rule, new coding for Principal Illness Navigation (PIN) services is being proposed. In considering the appropriate patient population to receive these services, we considered the patient population eligible for principal care management service codes (CPT codes 99424 through 99427), as well as clinical definitions of “serious illness.” For example, one peer-review study defined “serious illness” as a health condition that carries a high risk of mortality and either negatively impacts a person's daily function or quality of life, or excessively strains their caregivers. 167 Another study describes a serious illness as a health condition that carries a high risk of mortality and commonly affects a patient for several years, while some measure serious illness by the amount of urgent health care use (911 calls, emergency department visits, repeated hospitalizations) and polypharmacy. 168 The navigation services such patients need are similar to CHI services, but Social Determinants of Health (SDOH) need(s) may be fewer or not present. Accordingly, a parallel set of services focused on patients with a serious, high-risk illness who may not necessarily have SDOH-related needs is being proposed. PIN services could be furnished following an initiating E/M visit addressing a single high-risk disease.

167 Kelley AS, Bollens-Lund E. Identifying the Population with Serious Illness: The “Denominator” Challenge. J Palliat Med. 2018 Mar;21(S2):S7-S16. doi: 10.1089/jpm.2017.0548. Epub 2017 Nov 10. PMID: 29125784; PMCID: PMC5756466. available at https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29125784/.

168 Silver, Alison. Serious Illness: A High Priority for Accountable Care. The American Journal of Accountable Care. 2020;8(2):32-33. available at https://www.ajmc.com/view/serious-illness-a-high-priority-for-accountable-care.

The following codes would be reported for PIN services:

GXXX3—Principal Illness Navigation services by certified or trained auxiliary personnel under the direction of a physician or other practitioner, including a patient navigator or certified peer specialist; 60 minutes per calendar month, in the following activities:

• Person-centered assessment, performed to better understand the individualized context of the serious, high-risk condition.

++ Conducting a person-centered assessment to understand the patient's life story, needs, goals, preferences, and desired outcomes, including understanding cultural and linguistic factors.

++ Facilitating patient-driven goal setting and creating an action plan.

++ Providing tailored support as needed to accomplish the practitioner's treatment plan.

• Identifying or referring patient (and caregiver or family, if applicable) to appropriate supportive services.

• Practitioner, Home, and Community-Based Care Coordination

++ Coordinating receipt of needed services from healthcare practitioners, providers and facilities; home-, and community-based service providers; and caregiver (if applicable).

++ Communication with practitioners, home-, and community-based service providers, hospitals, and skilled nursing facilities (or other health care facilities) regarding the patient's psychosocial strengths and needs, functional deficits, goals, and preferences, including cultural and linguistic factors.

++ Coordination of care transitions between and among health care practitioners and settings, including transitions involving referrals to other clinicians; follow-up after an emergency department visit; or follow-up after discharges from hospitals, skilled nursing facilities or other health care facilities.

++ Facilitating access to community-based social services (e.g., housing, utilities, transportation, food assistance) as needed to address SDOH need(s).

• Health education—Helping the patients contextualize health education provided by the patient's treatment team with the patient's individual needs, goals, preferences, and SDOH need(s), and educating the patient (and caregiver, if applicable) on how to best participate in medical decision-making.

• Building patient self-advocacy skills, so that the patient can interact with members of the health care team and related community-based services (as needed), in ways that are more likely to promote personalized and effective treatment of their condition.

• Health care access/health system navigation.

++ Helping the patient access healthcare, identifying appropriate practitioners or providers for clinical care and helping secure appointments with them.

• Facilitating behavioral change necessary for meeting diagnosis and treatment goals, including promoting patient motivation to participate in care and reach person-centered diagnosis or treatment goals.

• Facilitating and providing social and emotional support for the patient to help the patient cope with the condition, SDOH need(s), and adjust daily routines to better meet diagnosis or treatment goals.

• Leverage knowledge of the serious, high-risk condition and/or lived experience when applicable to provide support, mentorship, or inspiration to meet treatment goals.

GXXX4—Principal Illness Navigation services, additional 30 minutes per calendar month (List separately in addition to GXXX3).

As discussed in section II.E. of this proposed rule, a billing practitioner may arrange to have PIN services provided by auxiliary personnel who are external to, and under contract with, the practitioner or their practice, such as through a community-based organization (CBO) that employs CHWs, if all of the “incident to” and other requirements and conditions for payment of PIN services are met. We would expect the auxiliary personnel performing the PIN services to communicate regularly with the billing practitioner to ensure that PIN services are appropriately documented in the medical record, and to continue to involve the billing practitioner in evaluating the continuing need for PIN services to address the serious, high-risk condition. Refer to section II.E. of this proposed rule for detailed, technical discussion regarding the description, payment and utilization of these HCPCS codes.

Since the proposal described in section II.E. of this proposed rule proposes to designate PIN services as care management services that may be furnished under general supervision under § 410.26(b)(5) and because we broadly include care management services in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we believe it would be similarly appropriate to include PIN services in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment. Additionally, since these services are meant to provide assistance to the beneficiary through communication and coordination with practitioners, providers, including referrals to other clinicians and follow-up after emergency or inpatient care, we believe that these services can further the ACO's goal of care coordination and the provision of value-based care and should, therefore, be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment. Further, since PIN services require an initiating E/M visit and these services can be billed as incident to by the billing practitioner who bills for the PIN initiating E/M visit, and E/M services are currently included in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we believe it would be similarly appropriate to include PIN services in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

• SDOH Risk Assessment HCPCS code GXXX5, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policies: In section II.E. of this proposed rule, a new stand-alone G code, GXXX5 ( administration of a standardized, evidence-based Social Determinants of Health Risk Assessment tool, 5-15 minutes, at most every 6 months. ) is being proposed to identify and value the work involved in the utilization of SDOH risk assessment as part of a comprehensive social history when medically reasonable and necessary in relation to an E/M visit. SDOH risk assessment through a standardized, evidence-based tool can more effectively and consistently identify unmet SDOH needs and enables comparisons across populations. The SDOH risk assessment must be furnished by the practitioner on the same date they furnish an E/M visit, as the SDOH assessment would be reasonable and necessary when used to inform the patient's treatment plan that is established during the visit. Required elements are described in detail in the payment policy proposal described in section II.E.

Under the proposal described in section II.E. of this proposed rule, the practitioner billing or furnishing the SDOH risk assessment would be required to have the ability to furnish CHI or other care management services. Given the multifaceted nature of SDOH needs, ensuring adequate referral to appropriate services and supports is critical for addressing both the SDOH need and the impact of that need on the patient's health. Refer to section II.E. of this proposed rule for detailed, technical discussion regarding the description, payment and utilization of these HCPCS codes.

Additionally, the proposal detailed in section III.T of this proposed rule proposes to add elements to the Annual Wellness Visit (AWV) by adding a new SDOH Risk Assessment as an optional, additional element with an additional payment. Under this proposal, the SDOH Risk Assessment would be separately payable with no beneficiary cost sharing when furnished as part of the same visit with the same date of service as the AWV, and would inform the care the patient is receiving during the visit, including taking a medical and social history, applying health assessments, and conducting prevention services education and planning.

Since the proposals described in sections II.E. and III.T. of this proposed rule propose that these services would be provided in conjunction with professional services, such as E/M visits, which can be provided in a primary care setting, we believe it would be appropriate to include these services in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment. Additionally, since these are separately payable services when provided with an AWV and the AWV is included in the Shared Savings Program definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we believe it would be appropriate to include SDOH risk assessment in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment. Further, since these services precede the utilization of CHI, PIN, and Care Management services, which are either currently included or proposed to be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of assignment, we believe the inclusion of the new SDOH risk assessment HCPCS code would be appropriate as well.

• Caregiver Behavior Management Training CPT Codes 96202 and 96203, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy: CPT code 96202 ( Multiple-family group behavior management/modification training for guardians/caregivers of patients with a mental or physical health diagnosis, administered by physician or other qualified health care professional (without the patient present), face-to-face with multiple sets of guardians/caregivers; initial 60 minutes ) and its add-on code, CPT code 96203 ( Multiple-family group behavior management/modification training for guardians/caregivers of patients with a mental or physical health diagnosis, administered by physician or other qualified health care professional (without the patient present), face-to-face with multiple sets of guardians/caregivers; each additional 15 minutes (List separately in addition to code for primary service) ) are two new codes created by the CPT Editorial Panel during its February 2021 meeting used to report the total duration of face-to-face time spent by the physician or other qualified health professional providing group training to guardians or caregivers of patients. Although the patient does not attend the group trainings, the goals and outcomes of the sessions focus on interventions aimed at improving the patient's daily life.

In section II.E. of this proposed rule, an active payment status for CPT codes 96202 and 96203 (caregiver behavior management/modification training services) is being proposed for CY 2024. These codes allow treating practitioners to report training furnished to a caregiver, in tandem with the diagnostic and treatment services furnished directly to the patient, in strategies and specific activities to assist the patient to carry out the treatment plan. Caregiver behavior management/modification training services may be reasonable and necessary when they are integral to a patient's overall treatment and furnished after the treatment plan (or therapy plan of care) is established. The caregiver behavior management/modification training services themselves need to be congruent with the treatment plan in order to effectuate the desired patient outcomes.

For purposes of caregiver behavior management/modification training services, the proposal requires that a caregiver receiving behavior management/modification training services is a family member, friend, or neighbor who provides unpaid assistance to the patient, assisting or acting as a proxy for a patient with an illness or condition of short or long-term duration (not necessarily chronic or disabling). In this context, caregivers would be trained by the treating practitioner in strategies and specific activities that improve symptoms, functioning, adherence to treatment, and/or general welfare related to the patient's primary clinical diagnoses. Under this proposal, caregiver behavior management/modification training services may be furnished directly by the treating practitioner or provided by auxiliary personnel incident to the treating practitioner's professional services as specified in 42 CFR 410.26, as applicable for the types of practitioners whose covered services include “incident to” services. Refer to section II.E. of this proposed rule for detailed, technical discussion regarding the description, payment and utilization of these HCPCS codes.

Since the proposal described in section II.E. of this proposed rule proposes that these services can be billed as incident to by the billing practitioner who could be a primary care physician who also bills for an E/M visit, and these services cannot duplicate services provided in conjunction with transitional care management, chronic care management, behavioral health integration services, and virtual check-in services which are currently included in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we believe that these services should be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment in support of the Shared Savings mission to give coordinated, high quality care to an ACO's Medicare beneficiaries.

• Caregiver Training Services CPT codes 9X015, 9X016, and 9X017, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy: CPT codes 9X015 ( Caregiver training in strategies and techniques to facilitate the patient's functional performance in the home or community (e.g., activities of daily living [ADLs], instrumental ADLs [IADLs], transfers, mobility, communication, swallowing, feeding, problem solving, safety practices) (without the patient present), face-to-face; initial 30 minutes ), add-on code, CPT code 9X016 ( each additional 15 minutes (List separately in addition to code for primary service) (Use 9X016 in conjunction with 9X015) ), and 9X017 ( Group caregiver training in strategies and techniques to facilitate the patient's functional performance in the home or community (e.g., activities of daily living [ADLs], instrumental ADLs [IADLs], transfers, mobility, communication, swallowing, feeding, problem solving, safety practices) (without the patient present), face-to-face with multiple sets of caregivers ) are new codes created by the CPT Editorial Panel during its October 2022 meeting. The three codes are to be used to report the total duration of face-to-face time spent by the physician or other qualified health professional providing individual or group training to caregivers of patients. Although the patient does not attend the trainings, the goals and outcomes of the sessions focus on interventions aimed at improving the patient's ability to successfully perform activities of daily living (ADLs). Activities of daily living generally include ambulating, feeding, dressing, personal hygiene, continence, and toileting.

These codes allow treating practitioners to report the training furnished to a caregiver, in tandem with the diagnostic and treatment services furnished directly to the patient, in strategies and specific activities to assist the patient to carry out the treatment plan. As discussed above, we believe training furnished to a caregiver may be reasonable and necessary when it is integral to a patient's overall treatment and furnished after the treatment plan (or therapy plan of care) is established. The Caregiver Training Services (CTS) themselves need to be congruent with the treatment plan in order to effectuate the desired patient outcomes, especially in medical treatment scenarios where the caregiver receiving CTS is necessary to ensure a successful treatment outcome for the patient.

In section II.E., an active payment status for CPT codes 9X015, 9X016, and 9X017 for CY 2024 under the PFS is proposed. CTS may be furnished directly by the treating practitioner or provided by auxiliary personnel incident to the treating practitioner's professional services as specified in 42 CFR 410.26, as applicable for the types of practitioners whose covered services include “incident to” services. Under this proposal, 9X015, 9X016, and 9X017 are designated as “sometimes therapy”. This means that the services represented by these codes are always furnished under a therapy plan of care when provided by PTs, OTs, and SLPs; but, in cases where they are appropriately furnished by physicians and NPPs outside a therapy plan of care (that is, where the services are not integral to a therapy plan of care), they can be furnished under a treatment plan by physicians and NPPs. Refer to section II.E. of this proposed rule for detailed, technical discussion regarding the description, payment and utilization of these HCPCS codes.

Since the proposal described in section II.E. of this proposed rule proposes that these services can be billed as incident to by the billing practitioner who could be a primary care physician who also bills for an E/M visit, and these services cannot duplicate services provided in conjunction with transitional care management, chronic care management, behavioral health integration services, and virtual check-in services which are currently included in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment, and we believe that these services are reported to Medicare only when furnished in conjunction with treatment for particular conditions and reflected in a plan of care, we believe they should be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment in support of the Shared Savings Program mission to give coordinated, high quality care to an ACO's Medicare beneficiaries.

We propose to specify a revised definition of primary care services in a new provision of the Shared Savings Program regulations at § 425.400(c)(1)(viii) to include the list of HCPCS and CPT codes specified in § 425.400(c)(1)(vii) along with the proposed additional CPT codes 99406 and 99407, and 99457 and 99458, 96202 and 96203, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy; and 9X015, 9X016, and 9X017, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy and HCPCS codes G0101; G2086, G2087, and G2088; G2211, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy; GXXX1 and GXXX2, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy; GXXX3 and GXXX4, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy; and GXXX5, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy; as discussed in the preceding paragraphs. We propose that the new provision at § 425.400(c)(1)(viii) would be applicable for use in determining beneficiary assignment for the performance year starting on January 1, 2024, and subsequent performance years.

We seek comment on these proposed changes to the definition of primary care services used for assigning beneficiaries to Shared Savings Program ACOs for the performance year starting on January 1, 2024, and subsequent performance years. We also welcome comments on any other existing HCPCS or CPT codes and new HCPCS or CPT codes proposed elsewhere in this proposed rule that we should consider adding to the definition of primary care services for purposes of assignment in future rulemaking.

4. Benchmarking Methodology

a. Overview

In this section of the proposed rule, we are proposing modifications to the benchmarking methodology under the Shared Savings Program. We propose a combination of modifications to the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology to encourage sustained participation by ACOs in the program. Specifically, we are proposing to revise the benchmarking methodology by modifying the existing calculation of the regional update factor used to update the historical benchmark between benchmark year (BY) 3 and the performance year (section III.G.4.b. of this proposed rule). We are additionally proposing to further mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustment to the historical benchmark (section III.G.4.c. of this proposed rule). We are also proposing refinements to the prior savings adjustment calculation methodology (section III.G.4.d. of this proposed rule), that would apply in the establishment of benchmarks for renewing ACOs and re-entering ACOs entering an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, to account for the following: a change in savings earned by the ACO in a benchmark year due to compliance action taken to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or a change in the amount of savings or losses for a benchmark year as a result of issuance of revised initial determination under § 425.315. Finally, we propose to specify in the regulations an approach to calculating prospective HCC risk scores used in Shared Savings Program benchmark calculations, applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, in which we would use the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) applicable to the calendar year corresponding to the performance year to calculate a Medicare FFS beneficiary's prospective HCC risk score for the performance year, and for each benchmark year of the ACO's agreement period (section III.G.4.e. of this proposed rule). Our specific proposals are discussed in detail in the following sections.

b. Proposal To Cap Regional Service Area Risk Score Growth for Symmetry With ACO Risk Score Cap

(1) Background

In the June 2016 final rule (81 FR 37977 through 37981), we established a policy of utilizing a regional growth rate to update the benchmark annually. In that rule, we finalized a policy that, for ACOs in their second or subsequent agreement period whose rebased historical benchmark incorporates an adjustment to reflect regional expenditures, the annual update to the benchmark would be calculated as a growth rate that reflects growth in risk adjusted regional per beneficiary FFS spending for the ACO's regional service area, for each of the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible (refer to § 425.603(d)).

In proposing and finalizing the regional growth rate policy, we explained that incorporating regional expenditures in the benchmark would make the ACO's cost target more independent of its historical expenditures and more reflective of FFS spending in its region. We also explained that the use of regional trend factors to trend forward BY1 and BY2 to BY3 in resetting ACO benchmarks and regional growth rates used to update the historical benchmark to the performance year annually would likely result in relatively higher benchmarks for ACOs that are low growth relative to their region compared to benchmarks for ACOs that are high growth relative to their region (refer to 81 FR 37955).

In the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68013 through 68031), we finalized a proposal to use a blend of national and regional trend factors to trend forward BY1 and BY2 to BY3 when determining the historical benchmark and a blend of national and regional update factors to update the historical benchmark to the performance year for all agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019 (refer to § 425.601(a) and (b)). Under this policy, the national component of the blended trend and update factors receives a weight equal to the share of assignable beneficiaries in the regional service area that are assigned to the ACO, computed by taking a weighted average of county-level shares. The regional component of the blended trend and update factors receives a weight equal to 1 minus the national weight. Calculations are made separately for each Medicare enrollment type. In the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68024), we acknowledged that, for an ACO that serves a high proportion of beneficiaries in select counties making up its regional service area (referred to herein as having “high market share”), a purely regional trend would be more influenced by the ACO's own expenditure patterns, making it more difficult for the ACO to outperform its benchmark and conflicting with our goal to move ACOs away from benchmarks based solely on their own historical costs. Incorporating national trends that are more independent of an ACO's own performance was therefore intended to reduce the influence of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries on the ultimate blended trend and update factors applied.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69881 through 69899), we finalized a policy for agreement periods starting on or after January 1, 2024, under which we will update the historical benchmark between BY3 and the performance year for each year of the agreement period using a three-way blend calculated as a weighted average of a two-way blend of national and regional growth rates determined after the end of each performance year and a fixed projected growth rate determined at the beginning of the ACO's agreement period called the Accountable Care Prospective Trend (ACPT) (refer to § 425.652(b)). Under this policy, we will make separate calculations for expenditure categories for each Medicare enrollment type. We explained that incorporating this prospective trend in the update to the benchmark would insulate a portion of the annual update from any savings occurring as a result of the actions of ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program and address the impact of increasing market penetration by ACOs in a regional service area on the existing blended national-regional growth factor.

For ACOs in agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years, we account for changes in severity and case mix of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population when establishing the benchmark for an agreement period and also in adjusting the benchmark for each performance year during the agreement period. In accordance with § 425.601(a)(3) and § 425.652(a)(3), in establishing the benchmark, we adjust expenditures for changes in severity and case mix using CMS Hierarchical Condition Category (CMS-HCC) prospective risk scores (herein referred to as prospective HCC risk scores). Pursuant to § 425.601(a)(10) and § 425.652(a)(10), we further adjust the ACO's historical benchmark at the time of reconciliation for a performance year to account for changes in severity and case mix for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year (refer to § 425.605(a)(1), (a)(2); § 425.610(a)(2), (a)(3)). In performing this risk adjustment, we make separate adjustments for the population of assigned beneficiaries in each Medicare enrollment type used in the Shared Savings Program (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible).

As finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69932 through 69946), for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024, we will use prospective HCC risk scores to adjust the historical benchmark for changes in severity and case mix for all assigned beneficiaries between BY3 and the performance year, with positive adjustments subject to a cap equal to the ACO's aggregate growth in demographic risk scores between BY3 and the performance year plus 3 percentage points (herein referred to as the “aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap”) (refer to § 425.605(a)(1)(ii); § 425.610(a)(2)(ii)). This cap applies only if the ACO's aggregate growth in prospective HCC risk scores between BY3 and the performance year across all of the Medicare enrollment types (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible) exceeds this cap. If the cap is determined to apply, the value of the cap is the maximum increase in prospective HCC risk scores (expressed as a ratio of the ACO's performance year risk score to the ACO's BY3 risk score) for the applicable performance year, such that any positive adjustment between BY3 and the performance year cannot be larger than the value of the aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap for any of the Medicare enrollment types. This cap is applied separately for the population of beneficiaries in each Medicare enrollment type.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we further explained that we were finalizing the aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap to address concerns with the prior approach to risk adjustment, which used prospective HCC risk scores to adjust the historical benchmark for changes in severity and case mix for all assigned beneficiaries between BY3 and the performance year, subject to a cap of positive 3 percent for the agreement period that was applied separately by Medicare enrollment type (referred to herein as the “3 percent cap”) (refer to § 425.605(a)(1)(i); § 425.610(a)(2)(i)). The 3 percent cap was finalized through the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68013) and is applicable to ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, and prior to January 1, 2024.

We believe that the aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap addresses several concerns raised by interested parties 169 about the 3 percent cap by: accounting for higher volatility in prospective HCC risk scores for certain Medicare enrollment types due to smaller sample sizes; allowing for higher benchmarks than the prior risk adjustment methodology for ACOs that care for larger proportions of beneficiaries in aged/dual eligible, disabled and ESRD enrollment types (which are frequently subject to the 3 percent cap); and continuing to safeguard the Trust Funds by limiting returns from coding initiatives. However, the demographics plus 3 percent cap does not address concerns from certain interested parties that the current policy places a cap on an ACO's risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year but does not place a cap on the regional prospective HCC risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year, which is reflected in the regional growth rate used to calculate the update factor (pursuant to § 425.652(b)(2)(ii)). 170

169 For summaries of these concerns of interested parties, refer to the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65302 through 65306), CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69932 through 69934).

170 For summaries of these concerns of interested parties, refer to the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84783 through 84785), the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65302 through 65306), and the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 66942 and 69943).

Under the methodology finalized in CY 2023 PFS final rule, as described in § 425.652(b), we express the regional update factor, used to update the historical benchmark to the performance year, as the ratio of an ACO's performance year regional service area risk adjusted expenditures to its BY3 regional service area risk adjusted expenditures for each Medicare enrollment type. Table 31 provides a numeric example of the current methodology for calculating the regional update factor for the ESRD Medicare enrollment type for a hypothetical ACO with a regional service area that includes counties A, B, C, and D.

Pursuant to § 425.654, an ACO's regional expenditures are calculated using risk adjusted county FFS expenditures. The counties included in the ACO's regional service area are based on the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for the applicable benchmark or performance year. We determine average county FFS expenditures based on expenditures for the assignable population 171 of beneficiaries in each county in the ACO's regional service area. We make separate calculations for each Medicare enrollment type. We adjust these county-level FFS expenditures (refer to Table 31, rows [A] and [F]) for severity and case mix of assignable beneficiaries in the county using county-level prospective HCC risk scores (refer to Table 31, rows [B] and [G]). The adjustment is made by dividing the county-level FFS expenditures for the Medicare enrollment type by county-level prospective HCC risk scores for the Medicare enrollment type, resulting in risk adjusted county-level FFS expenditures shown in Table 31 rows [C] and [H].

171 Assignable beneficiary expenditures are calculated using the payment amounts included in Parts A and B FFS claims with dates of service in the 12-month calendar year that corresponds to the relevant benchmark or performance year, using a 3-month claims run out with a completion factor. These expenditure calculations exclude IME and DSH payments, and the supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and Puerto Rico hospitals; and consider individually beneficiary identifiable final payments made under a demonstration, pilot or time limited program. Refer to § 425.654(a)(2). The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for the assignment window corresponding to the relevant benchmark or performance year that is consistent with the assignment window that applies under the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii). Refer to § 425.654(a)(1)(i). We refer readers to the discussion of the proposed changes to the methodology for identifying the assignable beneficiary population in section III.G.3.a of this proposed rule.

We then calculate an ACO's regional expenditures for each Medicare enrollment type by weighting these risk adjusted county-level FFS expenditures according to the ACO's proportion of assigned beneficiaries 172 in the county for that Medicare enrollment type (refer to Table 31, rows [D] and [I]), determined by the number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries in the applicable population (according to Medicare enrollment type) residing in the county in relation to the ACO's total number of assigned beneficiaries in the applicable population (according to Medicare enrollment type) for the relevant benchmark or performance year. We then aggregate those values for each population of beneficiaries (according to Medicare enrollment type) across all counties within the ACO's regional service area 173 (refer to Table 31, rows [E] and [J]).

172 Proportions are calculated using beneficiary person years.

173 Refer to the Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications (version #11, January 2023), sections 4.1.1 “Determining Regional FFS Expenditures” and 4.1.4 “Risk Adjusting and Updating the Historical Benchmark”, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-2 .

We then calculate the regional update factor as the ratio of an ACO's performance year expenditures to BY3 regional expenditures. This calculation is performed separately for each Medicare enrollment type. Refer to Table 31, row [K] for an example of how the regional update factor would be calculated for the ESRD Medicare enrollment type. This calculation would then be repeated for each of the other Medicare enrollment types.

While the regional expenditures for BY3 and the performance year are risk adjusted, as described previously in this section, there is currently no cap on prospective HCC risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area between BY3 and the performance year. As discussed previously in this section, ACOs and other interested parties have expressed concerns that the program's current cap on ACO risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year does not account for risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area and that there is not an equivalent cap on regional risk score growth. High prospective HCC risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area between BY3 and the performance year has the effect of decreasing the regional update factor, resulting in a lower updated benchmark for the ACO than if the regional risk score growth were capped (assuming that the risk score growth was high enough to be capped). In past rulemaking, some commenters have encouraged CMS to adopt a policy of applying a cap on ACO risk score growth after accounting for regional increase in risk scores. 174 Others have suggested more generally that CMS align the use of a risk adjustment cap for the ACO and its region by applying a consistent capping policy to both. 175

174 Refer to CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84784).

175 Refer to CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84784) and CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69943).

In the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39294 through 39295), we sought comment on an alternate approach to capping ACO prospective HCC risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year in relation to the prospective HCC risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area. The option we presented was to allow an ACO's risk score growth cap to increase above 3 percent by a percentage of the difference between the 3 percent cap and risk score growth in the AC”s regional service area for a given Medicare enrollment type. In this alternate approach (herein referred to as the “3 percent cap plus regional difference”), the percentage applied would be equal to 1 minus the ACO's regional market share for the Medicare enrollment type. For example, if regional risk score growth for a particular Medicare enrollment type was 5 percent and the ACO's regional market share was 20 percent, we would increase the cap on the ACO's risk score growth for that Medicare enrollment type by an amount equal to the difference between the regional risk score growth and the 3 percent cap (2 percent) multiplied by one minus the ACO's regional market share (80 percent). Thus, the ACO would face a cap for this Medicare enrollment type equal to 4.6 percent instead of 3 percent (3 percent + (2 percent × 80 percent)). This approach would raise the 3 percent cap while limiting the ability for ACOs with high market share to increase their cap by engaging in coding intensity initiatives that raise the regional prospective HCC risk score. As discussed in the CY 2022 PFS final rule, a few commenters noted their support for this 3 percent cap plus regional difference methodology. 176 MedPAC, however, expressed concern that increasing the cap beyond 3 percent could effectively reward ACOs for greater coding intensity in their region, particularly for those with higher market share. 177 178

176 Refer to 86 FR 65304.

177 Refer to 86 FR 65303 through 65305. 178 Refer to Letter from MedPAC to Chiquita Brooks-LaSure, Administrator, CMS (September 9, 2021), regarding File code CMS-1751-P (pages 16-18 “Risk adjustment methodology”), available at https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/09092021_PartB_CMS1751_MedPAC_Comment_V2_SEC.pdf .

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69932 through 69946), we indicated that we had considered the 3 percent cap plus regional difference methodology described in the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule. However, we opted not to propose this policy and instead proposed, and ultimately finalized, the aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap. One reason we did not propose the 3 percent cap plus regional difference was that a relatively small share of ACOs affected by the 3 percent cap operated in regional service areas where regional risk score growth was greater than 3 percent, indicating that this was not a widespread issue impacting ACO performance. Additionally, we explained that we still had concerns that allowing the cap on an ACO's risk score growth to increase with regional risk score growth could incentivize ACOs, particularly those with high market share, to engage in coding behavior that would increase their cap, even if this incentive would be mitigated to some degree by limiting the allowable increase in the cap based on the ACO's market share. Under the 3 percent cap, ACOs with high market share have a disincentive to engage in coding initiatives, as it could increase risk score growth in their regional service area and potentially decrease the value of the regional component of their update factor. We noted that raising the 3 percent cap based on risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area could change these incentives and encourage ACOs to engage in coding initiatives. In addition to finalizing the aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap, in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we noted that we declined to consider an approach that would impose a direct cap on risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area (87 FR 69932 through 69947). As with the 3 percent cap plus regional difference, we were concerned that such an approach would create adverse incentives for coding behavior, especially for ACOs with high market share.

In response to the discussion of the cap on prospective HCC risk score growth in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, commenters took the opportunity to reiterate their concerns that the program's current cap on ACO risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year does not account for risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area and suggested ways to incorporate a cap on regional risk score growth. A couple of commenters requested that the risk score cap be allowed to further increase for ACOs in regions where risk score growth exceeds the cap, with one stating that a flat percentage cap will always disadvantage ACOs in regions where risk score growth exceeds the cap and another stating that this additional flexibility would ensure ACOs are not disadvantaged by operating in underserved communities. Additionally, many commenters supported capping regional risk score growth in addition to capping ACO risk score growth. Several of those commenters stated that it was critical that, whatever policy CMS adopted for capping ACOs' risk score growth, the same policy must also apply to regional risk score growth. Several commenters noted that CMS should not apply adjustments to only one side of the equation, that is, capping ACO risk ratios without capping regional risk ratios, with many commenters saying this would lead to unintended consequences and another commenter saying it would have inequitable results. Several commenters stated that not capping increases in regional risk scores would stifle growth in exactly the areas CMS wants growth the most. A few commenters explained that lack of regional risk score growth caps incentivizes ACOs not to grow in places with certain types of populations, such as those with increasing health burdens, higher needs, or higher numbers of aged/dual and disabled enrollees. 179 In response to these comments, we indicated that we would continue to monitor the impacts of regional risk score growth and may propose further refinements to our risk adjustment policies in future rulemaking. 180

179 Refer to 87 FR 69942 through 69943.

180 Refer to 87 FR 69943.

(2) Proposed Revisions

Since the publication of the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we have performed further analysis on prospective HCC risk score growth in ACOs' regional service area between BY3 and the performance year and considered ways in which we could reduce impacts to ACOs in regions with high risk score growth, particularly when such growth is not due to the ACO's own complete and accurate coding, while also limiting the impact from coding initiatives, particularly among ACOs with high market share. Based on this additional analysis, which is detailed later in this section, we are proposing to modify the calculation of the regional update factor used to update the historical benchmark between BY3 and the performance year. The proposed approach would cap prospective HCC risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area between BY3 and the performance year by applying an adjustment factor to the regional update factor. This cap on regional risk score growth would be applied independently of the cap on an ACO's own prospective HCC risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year, meaning that this proposed cap on prospective HCC risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area would be applied whether or not the ACO's prospective risk score growth was capped when updating the benchmark between BY3 and the performance year. Applying these caps independently would be more equitable to ACOs serving high risk patients in regions with high risk score growth, and avoid creating incentives for ACOs to avoid high risk and more medically complex patients. Adjusting the regional service area risk score growth cap based on the percentage of original Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries the ACO serves in the region would help to mitigate the impact an ACO's own coding initiatives have on risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area, particularly when the ACO has a greater influence on its regional service area risk score growth rate.

To determine the cap on prospective HCC risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area we propose to follow a similar methodology as the one adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule 181 for capping ACO risk score growth, codified at § 425.605(a)(1)(ii) and § 425.610(a)(2)(ii), while additionally accounting for an ACO's aggregate market share. The effect of the regional risk score growth cap would be to increase the regional component of the update factor for ACOs in regions with aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth above the cap, with ACOs with higher aggregate market shares seeing smaller increases, all else being equal. ACOs in regions with aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth below the cap would not be affected by the proposed policy.

181 87 FR 69932 through 69946.

By symmetrically limiting risk score growth within both an ACO's assigned beneficiary population and its region, this proposed approach is expected to improve the accuracy of the regional update factors for ACOs operating in regional service areas with high risk score growth, particularly in later years of the 5-year agreement period where the difference between an ACO's BY3 and performance year regional risk scores is expected to be the greatest. We believe capping regional risk score growth will strengthen incentives for ACOs to form or continue to operate in regions with high risk score growth and thereby incentivize ACOs to care for higher risk beneficiaries. This approach would also offer an incentive for potential applicant ACOs that may be examining recent risk score growth in their region and making the decision whether to participate in the Shared Savings Program. Additionally, by adjusting the regional risk score growth cap based on ACO market share, this proposal would also maintain a disincentive against coding intensity for ACOs with high market share.

To implement the new cap on regional risk score growth, we would multiply the original regional update factor used to update the historical benchmark between BY3 and the performance year (determined in accordance with § 425.652(b)(2)(ii)) by a regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor. The regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor would be calculated as follows:

• Step 1: Calculate county-level risk scores. We would calculate county-level prospective HCC and demographic risk scores by Medicare enrollment type for both BY3 and the performance year. To do this for a given benchmark or performance year, we would first determine the renormalized, prospective HCC and demographic risk score for each assignable beneficiary 182 in each county in the ACO's regional service area. For both HCC and demographic risk scores, we would then compute the weighted average risk score for each county for each Medicare enrollment type by multiplying each assignable beneficiary's risk score for that Medicare enrollment type by the beneficiary's person years enrolled in that Medicare enrollment type, summing these weighted risk scores across all assignable beneficiaries for that Medicare enrollment type in the county, and then dividing by total person years for that Medicare enrollment type among assignable beneficiaries in the county. Note that this approach would be similar to the approach that is currently used to determine county-level prospective HCC risk scores as an intermediate step in calculating risk adjusted regional expenditures under the current methodology. 183

182 Consistent with our proposal to revise the definition of an assignable beneficiary (refer to section III.G.3.a of this proposed rule), we propose that the assignable population of beneficiaries for a benchmark or performance year would be identified using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the applicable performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

183 Refer to the Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications (version #11, January 2023), section 4.1.1 “Determining Regional FFS Expenditures”, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-2 .

• Step 2: Calculate regional risk scores. We would calculate regional-level BY3 and performance year prospective HCC and demographic risk scores as a weighted average of county-level HCC and demographic risk scores for the Medicare enrollment type (calculated in step 1), with weights reflecting the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries 184 in the county. This proportion is determined by the number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries (by Medicare enrollment type) residing in each county in relation to the ACO's total number of assigned beneficiaries for that Medicare enrollment type for the relevant benchmark or performance year. These would be the same weights as used to calculate regional expenditures under § 425.654(b).

184 Proportions are calculated using beneficiary person years.

• Step 3: Determine aggregate growth in regional risk scores. To calculate aggregate growth in regional risk scores, we would first calculate growth in prospective HCC and demographic risk scores between BY3 and the performance year for each Medicare enrollment type, expressed as the ratio of the performance year regional risk score for a Medicare enrollment type (calculated in step 2) to the BY3 regional risk score for that enrollment type (calculated in step 2). We would next take a weighted average of the regional prospective HCC or demographic risk ratios, as applicable, across the four Medicare enrollment types, where the weight applied to the growth in risk scores for each Medicare enrollment type would be the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary person years for the Medicare enrollment type multiplied by the ACO's regionally adjusted historical benchmark expenditures for the Medicare enrollment type. 185

185 These are the same weights that are to be used when calculating weighted average ACO prospective HCC and demographic risk ratios under the risk adjustment methodology adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69932 through 69946) and codified in §§ 425.605(a)(1)(ii)(C) and 425.610(a)(2)(ii)(C).

• Step 4: Determine the cap on regional risk score growth. We would first calculate the non-market share adjusted cap on the ACO's regional risk score growth as the sum of the aggregate growth in regional demographic risk scores (calculated in step 3) and 3 percentage points. 186

186 This is similar to the calculation of the cap on ACO prospective HCC risk score growth finalized in the CY 2023 PFS (87 FR 69932 through 69946) and codified in §§ 425.605(a)(1)(ii)(A) and 425.610(a)(2)(ii)(A).

We would next adjust the cap to reflect the ACO's aggregate market share. We would calculate an ACO's aggregate market share as a weighted average of the ACO's market share across the four Medicare enrollment types. An ACO's market share for each Medicare enrollment type would be equal to the weight that is applied to the national component of the blended update factor in the two-way blend that is calculated as the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO for the applicable performance year (refer to § 425.652(b)(2)(iv)). The weights for each Medicare enrollment type used to compute the weighted average would be the ACO's performance year assigned person years for the Medicare enrollment type.

We would adjust the cap on regional risk score growth to reflect the ACO's aggregate market share by adding to the non-market share adjusted cap the product of:

++ The ACO's aggregate market share, and

++ The difference (subject to a floor of zero) between:

-- The aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth (calculated in step 3), and

-- The non-market share adjusted cap (calculated first in this step).

This adjustment of the cap on regional risk score growth using the ACO's aggregate market share creates a sliding scale. Assuming that an ACO has aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth above the non-market share adjusted cap, an ACO with close to 0 percent aggregate market share would receive a market share adjusted cap on regional risk score growth close to the aggregate growth in regional demographic risk scores plus 3 percentage points and an ACO with 100 percent aggregate market share would receive a market share adjusted cap on regional risk score growth equal to the aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth calculated in step 3 (which is effectively no cap at all). Under this approach, as an ACO's aggregate market share increases, so does the cap on the ACO's regional risk score growth, ultimately limiting the potential increase to the regional update factor for ACOs with high market share.

• Step 5: Determine the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor. First, we would determine if the ACO's regional risk score growth is subject to a cap by comparing the ACO's aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth (calculated in step 3) to the market share adjusted cap on regional risk score growth (calculated in step 4).

++ If the aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth does not exceed the cap on regional risk score growth, the ACO's regional risk score growth would not be subject to the cap. For these ACOs we would set the risk score growth cap adjustment factor equal to 1 for each Medicare enrollment type (which is effectively no adjustment).

++ If the aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth exceeds the market share adjusted cap, the ACO's regional risk score growth is subject to the cap. For these ACOs we would next determine whether the cap on regional risk score growth applies for each Medicare enrollment type. To do this, we would compare regional prospective HCC risk score growth for each Medicare enrollment type (calculated in step 3) with the market share adjusted cap (calculated in step 4). If the regional risk score growth for a Medicare enrollment type does not exceed the cap, the enrollment type is not subject to the cap and the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor for that Medicare enrollment type is set equal to 1 (effectively no adjustment). Otherwise, the Medicare enrollment type is subject to the cap and we would set the adjustment factor for the Medicare enrollment type equal to the regional prospective HCC risk score growth for the Medicare enrollment type (calculated in step 3) divided by the market share adjusted cap calculated in step 4. In this case, the adjustment factor for the Medicare enrollment type would represent a measure of how far above the cap the regional prospective HCC risk score growth is.

Table 32 provides a numeric example of the calculation of the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor for a hypothetical ACO that is determined to be subject to the market share adjusted cap. Table 32 begins at the end of step 2 of the calculation, and therefore only reflects regional-level calculations and does not include the county-level calculations:

In this example, the hypothetical ACO was in a regional service area with aggregate prospective HCC risk score growth (a weighted average risk ratio of 1.039, refer to row [H]) above the market share adjusted cap of 1.021 (refer to row [N]). The ACO's regional prospective HCC risk score growth (shown in row [E]) was above this cap for three of the four Medicate enrollment types (all but the aged/dual eligible Medicare enrollment type). Therefore, the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor (refer to row [Q]) calculated for those three capped Medicare enrollment types was above one, and the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor calculated for the one uncapped Medicare enrollment type was equal to one. Once the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factors are multiplied by the original regional update factors used to update the historical benchmark between BY3 and the performance year, the regional update factor would increase for the three capped Medicare enrollment types. For example, if the original regional update factor for the ESRD Medicare enrollment type was 0.976, then the final regional ESRD update factor after the application of the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor would be 1.000 (the product of 0.976 and the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor of 1.025). There would be no change to the original regional update factor for the uncapped aged/dual eligible Medicare enrollment type as it would be multiplied by one. Because of the increase in original regional update factor for the three capped Medicare enrollment types, this hypothetical ACO would have a higher updated benchmark under this proposed policy than under current policy.

However, if an ACO was in a regional service area with aggregate prospective HCC risk score growth that was not above the regional risk score growth cap, the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor for all Medicare enrollment types would be equal to one, thus resulting in no change to the original regional update factor for any Medicare enrollment type and therefore no change to the ACO's updated benchmark compared to current policy.

We believe this proposed policy would help increase the accuracy of the regional update factor for ACOs operating in regional service areas with high risk score growth, including those serving more medically complex beneficiaries, therefore increasing incentives for ACOs to form or continue participation in such areas. At the same time, we believe that incorporating the market share adjustment helps to mitigate concerns related to coding intensity for ACOs with high market share and thus a relatively high level of influence over risk scores in the ACOs regional service area as discussed in section III.G.4.b.(1) of this proposed rule and would therefore protect the Trust Funds by continuing to limit incentives for this behavior.

We simulated the impact of the proposed policy using PY 2021 financial reconciliation data for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019. This simulation found that 38 of the 332 ACOs (11 percent) would have been subject to the cap on regional risk score growth determined in step 4 of the proposed methodology and therefore would have had a higher regional update factor than under current policy for at least one Medicare enrollment type. Thirty-six of those 38 ACOs were subject to the 3 percent cap on their own risk score growth for at least one enrollment type in actual PY 2021 results. Table 33 shows the percentage of ACOs determined to be subject to the cap on regional risk score growth for each Medicare enrollment type and the average increase in the regional update factor for that enrollment type among those ACOs.

While this modeling shows that only a small proportion of ACOs would have benefitted from this policy in PY 2021, our analyses have also shown that this proportion is predicted to increase as more ACOs advance farther into their 5-year agreement period. This is supported by the finding that ACOs in the simulation were significantly more likely to be impacted if their agreement period started in 2019 with a BY3 of 2018 (16 percent) than if their agreement period started in 2020 with a BY3 of 2019 (6 percent). 187 Because the analysis of PY 2021 data demonstrates that circumstances like the PHE for COVID-19 and progression along a 5-year agreement period can interact to increase the share of ACOs in regional service areas with aggregate regional risk score growth above the cap, we have determined that our initial concerns about creating adverse incentives for coding behavior by capping regional risk score growth, as discussed in section III.G.4.b.(1) of this proposed rule, are outweighed by the potential harm to ACOs in regions with high risk score growth, particularly when such growth is not due to the ACO's own coding activities. Additionally, we believe the market share adjustment to the cap on regional risk score growth will limit overly advantaging ACOs with high market share if they participate in coding initiatives.

187 While analysis of average FFS risk score changes at the hospital referral region (HRR) level further supports the assumption that more ACOs would be impacted toward the end of their 5-year agreement period, such analysis also indicates that variation from the PHE for COVID-19 likely accentuated this phenomenon in the simulation on PY2021 data. For this reason, the finding in the PY2021 simulation that 16 percent of 2019 starters were impacted is likely indicative of an upper bound for the share of ACOs potentially impacted by PY5 in agreement periods that start in 2024 or later (that is, where the impact of the PHE for COVID-19 is minimal in BY3 relative to the BY3s in this simulation).

Table 34 displays information on the impact of the market share adjustment on the cap on regional risk score growth within our simulation of the proposed policy in PY 2021 for the ACOs with the minimum, median, and maximum aggregate market share that were found to be subject to the cap on regional risk score growth.

Based on this data in Table 34, the majority of ACOs found to be impacted in this simulation had a relatively small aggregate market share, with a median of about 13 percent. Because of this, the median increase to the cap on regional risk score growth from the market share adjustment was small (0.001). (This is both the median increase among all 38 impacted ACOs and the increase for the impacted ACO with the median market share). Further analysis showed that results were similar among both rural and urban ACOs. Of the 38 impacted ACOs, 34 were classified as urban and had a median aggregate market share of about 12 percent. The remaining four impacted ACOs were rural ACOs with a median aggregate market share of about 24 percent. While the market share was higher on average among rural ACOs, average market share for both types of ACOs was under 25 percent and both groups had only a small median increase to the cap on regional risk score growth from the market share adjustment of 0.001. 188

188 For this analysis, ACOs were classified as rural if the plurality of their assigned beneficiaries resided in either micropolitan or noncore counties and urban if the plurality of their assigned beneficiaries resided in either large central metro, large fringe metro, medium metro, or small metro counties as defined by The United States Census Bureau and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).

ACOs with a larger aggregate market share received a larger increase in the cap on regional risk score growth due to the market share adjustment. For example, in Table 34, the ACO with the highest market share of 53.6 percent (an ACO that has a regional service area in an urban area), had a 20 percent increase in its cap from the market share adjustment, going from a non-market share adjusted cap of 1.008 to an adjusted cap of 1.028. We believe that, while the impact of the market share adjustment on the cap on regional risk score growth will be small for the majority of ACOs, this market share adjustment is important to address both our own concerns related to incentives for coding intensity and the similar concerns raised by MedPAC in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, as discussed in section III.G.4.b.(1) of this proposed rule. The market share adjustment to the cap limits the adverse coding incentives that can arise when allowing larger benchmark increases when an ACO increases its coding, especially for ACOs with high market share. Specifically, ACOs with high market share will still have a disincentive to engage in coding initiatives, as these initiatives could increase risk score growth in their regional service area and potentially decrease the value of the regional component of their update factor.

Apart from the market share adjustment, the calculation of the proposed cap on regional risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year is calculated in the same way as the aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap on ACO risk score growth under §§ 425.605(a)(1)(ii)(A) and 425.610(a)(2)(ii)(A). Specifically, the cap is calculated as the aggregate growth in regional demographic risk scores between BY3 and the performance year plus 3 percentage points, prior to application of the market share adjustment. Additionally, as a result of incorporating the risk adjustment into the regional update factor at the county level, the current methodology does not directly calculate a regional risk ratio that can be directly modified. The proposed approach of modifying the regional update factor by multiplying by an adjustment factor achieves the goal of reducing the impact of regional risk score growth while leaving the existing methodology for calculating risk-adjusted regional expenditures intact.

As we have explained in earlier rulemaking (see 87 FR 69887 and 69888), we have used our authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to adopt a three-way blended benchmark update factor (weighted one-third ACPT, and two-thirds national-regional blend) for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, in place of an update factor based on the projected absolute amount of growth in national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original FFS program as called for in section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act. Therefore, the proposed changes to the regional component of the three-way blended update factor described in this section of this proposed rule would similarly require continued use of our statutory authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act. Section 1899(i)(3) of the Act grants the Secretary the authority to use other payment models, including payment models that use alternative benchmarking methodologies, if the Secretary determines that doing so would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare program and program expenditures under the alternative methodology would be equal to or lower than those that would result under the statutory payment model. We believe the changes to the methodology for updating the benchmark that we are proposing pursuant to section 1899(i)(3) of the Act would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare Program. More specifically, we believe that the proposed changes to the regional component of the update factor would— in the context of the downward effects on the benchmark resulting from elevated variation in regional average prospective HCC risk score growth as shown in the PY 2021 analysis—reinforce the incentive for ACOs to enter and remain in the Shared Savings Program, particularly in regions with changing populations. Moreover, we believe that the proposed approach, by encouraging ACOs to enter and continue participation in the Shared Savings Program, would lead to improvement in the quality of care furnished to Medicare FFS beneficiaries because participating ACOs have an incentive to perform well on quality measures in order to maximize the shared savings they may receive. In addition, as discussed in the Regulatory Impact Analysis (section VII.E.10. of this proposed rule), we believe the proposed changes to the regional component of the three-way blended update factor, in combination with the other proposals for which we must use our authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act, would result in a marginal impact that is estimated to result in $330 million in lower net spending over the 10-year projection window, which supports our finding that the relatively minor changes to program spending resulting from these proposed changes would not violate the requirements of section 1899(i)(3)(B) of the Act. We will continue to reexamine this projection in the future to ensure that the requirement under section 1899(i)(3)(B) of the Act that an alternative payment model not result in additional program expenditures continues to be satisfied. In the event that we later determine that the payment model established under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act no longer meets this requirement, we would undertake additional notice and comment rulemaking to make adjustments to the payment model to assure continued compliance with the statutory requirements.

We propose to revise the Shared Savings Program regulations governing the calculation of the regional growth rate when updating the historical benchmark between BY3 and the performance year at § 425.652(c) to incorporate a regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor. We also propose to add a new section to the regulations at § 425.655 to describe the calculation of the adjustment factor.

We seek comment on the proposed changes to calculation of the regional component of the update factor for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024.

c. Mitigating the Impact of the Negative Regional Adjustment on the Benchmark To Encourage Participation by ACOs Caring for Medically Complex, High-Cost Beneficiaries

(1) Background

In earlier rulemaking we have discussed our use of the Secretary's discretion under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act to adjust the historical benchmark by “such other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate” in order to adjust ACO historical benchmarks to reflect FFS expenditures in the ACO's regional service area (81 FR 37962). We initially established a regional adjustment in a benchmark rebasing methodology that applied to ACOs entering a second agreement period beginning on January 1, 2017, January 1, 2018, or January 1, 2019 (§ 425.603(c) through (g)), before modifying our policy to apply this adjustment program wide beginning with agreement periods starting on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years (§ 425.601(a)(8)). In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69915 through 69923) we modified the way we would calculate the regional adjustment for ACOs in agreement periods starting on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years (§ 425.656). We also finalized a policy that would modify the way we would apply the regional adjustment to the benchmark that would also take into account a new adjustment for prior savings that would be available to eligible ACOs (§ 425.652(a)(8)).

In accordance with § 425.601(a)(8), for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019 and before January 1, 2024, we adjust historical benchmark expenditures by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries) by a percentage of the difference between the average per capita expenditure amount for the ACO's regional service area and the average per capita amount of the ACO's historical benchmark (referred to herein as the “regional adjustment”). The percentage applied in calculating the regional adjustment depends on whether the ACO has lower or higher spending compared to the ACO's regional service area and the agreement period for which the ACO is subject to the regional adjustment, according to the phase-in schedule of applicable weights. We cap the per capita dollar amount of the regional adjustment for each Medicare enrollment type at a dollar amount equal to positive or negative 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program in benchmark year (BY) 3 for assignable beneficiaries (as defined in § 425.20) in that Medicare enrollment type identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3 (§ 425.601(a)(8)(ii)(C)) (referred to herein as positive or negative 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries, and as the “symmetrical cap,” terms which we consider to be synonymous). We then apply the capped regional adjustment for each Medicare enrollment type by adding it to the historical benchmark expenditure for that enrollment type. A positive regional adjustment for a given Medicare enrollment type increases the benchmark for that enrollment type, whereas a negative regional adjustment decreases the benchmark for that enrollment type.

With the policies finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69915 through 69923), we sought to reduce the impact of negative regional adjustments in several ways for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and subsequent years. First, we finalized a policy that replaced the negative 5 percent cap on the negative regional adjustment with a negative 1.5 percent cap. Under this policy, we would continue to cap positive adjustments for each Medicare enrollment type at a dollar amount equal to 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for that enrollment type but would cap negative adjustments for each enrollment type at a dollar amount equal to negative 1.5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for that enrollment type. Additionally, after applying the negative 1.5 percent cap, we would apply an offset factor that would gradually decrease the negative regional adjustment amount for a given Medicare enrollment type as an ACO's proportion of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries increases or its weighted average prospective HCC risk score increases. Finally, for an ACO eligible for the prior savings adjustment for which the regional adjustment expressed as a single value (based on taking a person year weighted average across the four Medicare enrollment types) is negative, we would further offset the regional adjustment by the prior savings adjustment. In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69919) we expressed our belief that by reducing the impact of negative regional adjustments, these policies would incentivize ACOs that serve high-cost beneficiaries to join or continue to participate in the Shared Savings Program.

These policies to reduce the impact of negative regional adjustments are reflected in several new sections of the regulations. Section 425.652 is the main provision that describes the methodology for establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, including the interaction of the regional adjustment and the prior savings adjustment. Sections 425.656 and 425.658 provide additional detail on the calculations of the regional adjustment and the prior savings adjustment, respectively.

Table 35 illustrates how the caps to the regional adjustment would be calculated and applied to positive and negative regional adjustments at the Medicare enrollment type level under the policy finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule. Note that the uncapped regional adjustment values would be calculated using the applicable percentage phase-in weight based on whether the ACO has lower or higher spending as compared to its regional service area and the ACO's agreement period subject to a regional adjustment as described in § 425.656(d). For example, if an ACO is considered to have lower spending compared to the ACO's regional service area, and it is the ACO's first agreement period subject to the regional adjustment, we would use a weight of 35 percent when applying the regional adjustment. If an ACO is considered to have higher spending compared to the ACO's regional service area, and it is the ACO's first agreement period subject to the regional adjustment, we would use a weight of 15 percent when applying the regional adjustment.

The hypothetical ACO in this example has a mix of positive and negative regional adjustments across the four enrollment types. The ACO's uncapped aged/non-dual eligible adjustment is outside the negative 1.5 percent cap and thus changes from −$307 to −$166 when the cap is applied. The ACO's adjustments for the other three enrollment types are all within the applicable positive or negative caps and are thus unaffected. The ACO's overall weighted average regional adjustment (calculated by multiplying the adjustment for each enrollment type by the corresponding enrollment type proportion and then summing across the four enrollment types) changes from −$209 to −$111 when the negative regional adjustment cap is applied, reducing the per capita impact of the negative regional adjustment by $98.

Under the methodology adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69917 and 69920), after we apply the caps, we next apply an offset factor to any negative regional adjustments at the enrollment type level. The offset factor is based on the following: [A] the ACO's overall proportion of BY3 assigned beneficiaries that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid (including dually eligible ESRD, disabled, and aged beneficiaries) 189 and [B] the ACO's weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 taken across the four Medicare enrollment types. 190 Before taking this weighted average, the risk score for each enrollment type is first renormalized by dividing by the national mean risk score for the assignable FFS population for that enrollment type identified for the calendar year corresponding to BY3. Specifically, the offset factor is calculated as:

189 In computing this proportion, we use for each beneficiary the fraction of the year (referred to as person years) in which they were eligible for the aged/dual eligible enrollment type or for which they were eligible for the ESRD or disabled enrollment type and dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

190 In computing this weighted average, we apply a weight to the risk score for BY3 for an enrollment type that is equal to the product of the ACO's BY3 per capita expenditures for that enrollment type and the ACO's BY3 person years for that enrollment type.

Offset factor = [A] + ([B]−1)

We apply the offset factor, which is subject to a minimum of zero and a maximum of one, by subtracting its value from 1 and multiplying this difference by the negative regional adjustment for each Medicare enrollment type, calculated as:

Final regional adjustment = Negative regional adjustment × (1−Offset factor)

The higher an ACO's proportion of dually eligible beneficiaries or the higher its risk score, the larger the offset factor would be and the larger the reduction to the overall negative regional adjustment. If the offset factor is equal to the maximum value of one, the ACO would not receive a negative regional adjustment for any enrollment type, because each negative adjustment would be multiplied by a value of 1 minus the offset factor, or 0. For these ACOs, the overall weighted average regional adjustment would either be 0 (if the ACO had negative adjustments for all four enrollment types prior to the application of the offset factor) or positive (if the ACO had a mix of positive and negative adjustments at the enrollment type level prior to the application of the offset factor). If the offset factor is equal to the minimum value of zero, the ACO would receive no benefit from the offset factor.

To illustrate how the offset factor would be calculated and applied, assume that the hypothetical ACO from Table 35 had a proportion of dually eligible beneficiaries of 0.130 and a weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 of 1.240. The offset factor for this ACO would be calculated as:

Offset factor = 0.130 + (1.240−1) = 0.370

This factor would be applied as illustrated in Table 36 by multiplying the negative regional adjustment for each applicable Medicare enrollment type by 1 minus the offset factor or 0.630.

Here, the offset factor is applied to the regional adjustments for the disabled and aged/non-dual eligible populations, as both are negative, but not to the regional adjustments for the ESRD and aged/dual eligible populations, which are both positive. Taking the weighted average across the enrollment types following application of the offset factor shows that the ACO's overall weighted regional adjustment changes from −$111 before the offset to −$55 after the offset, further reducing the per capita impact of the negative regional adjustment by $56. The overall per capita impact of both the cap and offset factor for this ACO would be $154.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69918 and 69921) we presented simulations of the combined impact of the cap and offset factor relative to the symmetrical positive and negative 5 percent cap then in place for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years. The results of these simulations, which used data from PY 2020 historical benchmarks for ACOs in agreement periods starting on or after July 1, 2019, and from PY 2022 historical benchmarks for ACOs starting an agreement period on January 1, 2022, found the negative regional adjustment for almost every ACO that had an overall negative regional adjustment in the PY 2020 and PY 2022 data under the symmetrical cap would have been reduced (or eliminated), with an average per capita impact of approximately $114 for PY 2020 and $48 for PY 2022. ACOs with higher weighted average BY3 prospective HCC risk scores and higher proportions of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries had overall greater reductions in their negative regional adjustments. Four ACOs in the PY 2020 simulation and one in the PY 2022 simulation had an offset factor of 1, meaning they would have received a full offset to their negative regional adjustments.

Under a separate policy also finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, an ACO beginning an agreement period on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years that is a renewing or re-entering ACO may be eligible to receive an adjustment to its benchmark to account for savings generated in performance years that correspond to the benchmark years of its new agreement period. A full discussion of this policy can be found in that earlier rulemaking (87 FR 69899 through 69915). The policy was designed such that an eligible ACO would receive the higher of its overall positive regional adjustment or its prior savings adjustment, or a combination of the two if its overall regional adjustment is negative and it had prior savings. ACOs ineligible for the prior savings adjustment would receive the regional adjustment (computed as described earlier in this section applying a 5 percent cap on positive regional adjustments and a −1.5 percent cap and offset factor on negative regional adjustments). Specifically, if the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is positive, the ACO would receive a final adjustment equal to the higher of the regional adjustment or an adjustment based on the ACO's prior savings (see § 425.652(a)(8)(iii)(B)). If the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is negative, we would calculate the final adjustment as described in § 425.652(a)(8)(iii)(A), with the ACO receiving either a smaller negative regional adjustment or a positive adjustment for prior savings depending on the relative size of the negative regional adjustment and the ACO's pro-rated prior savings.

Based on further consideration, we believe it is important and timely to revisit the policy that allows for negative adjustments to be applied in establishing the benchmark for ACOs. While we did not consider eliminating negative regional adjustments program-wide in CY 2023 PFS rulemaking, one commenter noted that there is an argument for doing so. We believe further mitigating the impact of the negative regional adjustment for ACOs with high-cost populations, thereby resulting in higher benchmarks for ACOs compared to the recently finalized methodology, could further bolster the business case for Shared Savings Program participation by such ACOs.

As we discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46161), there is evidence that certain aspects of the program's benchmarking methodology, notably the regional adjustment to the benchmark, may deter participation among ACOs with spending above their regional service area including those serving medically complex, high-cost populations. High-cost ACOs are underrepresented in the Shared Savings Program, with around 86 percent of all participating ACOs receiving an overall positive regional adjustment in PY 2022 indicating that a majority of ACOs are lower spending than their regional service area. We also observed that ACOs that received an overall negative regional adjustment for PY 2022 were less likely to continue participation in the program in PY 2023 than were ACOs that received an overall positive regional adjustment, with 22 percent of ACOs with a negative overall adjustment leaving the program compared to 12 percent of ACOs with a positive overall adjustment. Since PY 2017 the overall annual average share of ACOs that leave the program has been 12 percent. A recent academic study also found evidence suggesting selective participation among ACOs in response to the original adoption of a regional adjustment in 2017, with the composition of ACOs between 2017 to 2019 increasingly shifting to providers with lower preexisting levels of spending. 191 The authors attributed these changes to a combination of the entry of new ACOs with lower baseline spending, the exit of higher-spending ACOs, and the reconfiguration of ACO participant lists to favor lower-spending practices among ACOs continuing participation in the program.

191 Lyu P, Chernew M, McWilliams J. Benchmarking Changes And Selective Participation In The Medicare Shared Savings Program. Health Affairs. May 1, 2023. Available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.2022.01061 .

Relatedly, we have observed that negative regional adjustments may make it more difficult for ACOs to succeed in the program financially. Between PY 2017, when regional adjustments were first introduced in the Shared Savings Program, and PY 2021, ACOs that received negative regional adjustments have been consistently less likely to share in savings than ACOs that received positive regional adjustments. For example, in PY 2021 we observed that 37 percent of ACOs that received a negative regional adjustment shared in savings compared to 63 percent among those with a positive adjustment.

We believe that eliminating the possibility that an ACO will receive an overall negative regional adjustment to its benchmark in combination with the other elements of the benchmarking methodology finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, would work together to further our efforts to ensure sustainability of the benchmarking methodology. More specifically, we believe this policy change would further encourage continued participation among high-cost ACOs that serve medically complex beneficiaries by eliminating the potential of a lower benchmark due to an overall negative regional adjustment. It may also encourage ACOs serving such populations that may have otherwise been discouraged from participating in the Shared Savings Program by the idea of a lower benchmark to join. The implementation of this policy would allow ACOs to serve the most vulnerable populations while lessening the concern of how this may affect their performance in the program. We believe that program participation by ACOs serving these populations has the potential, over time, to produce cost savings for the Medicare Trust funds by improving care coordination and quality of care for such beneficiaries.

Additionally, we believe that eliminating overall negative regional adjustments could further incentivize greater participation among ACOs whose ACO participants have historically been less efficient than other providers and suppliers in their regions. Such ACOs may have the greatest potential to generate cost savings for the Medicare Trust Funds by adopting more efficient practices, therefore we believe that their participation in the program should not be discouraged.

(2) Proposed Revisions

In light of these considerations, we are proposing to modify the policies we adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule so as to prevent any ACO from receiving an adjustment that would cause its benchmark to be lower than it would have been in the absence of a regional adjustment. Specifically, we are proposing the following approach to calculate and apply the regional adjustment, or the regional adjustment in combination with the prior savings adjustment, if applicable, for ACOs in agreement periods starting on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years:

• We would continue to calculate the original uncapped regional adjustment by Medicare enrollment type using the applicable percentage phase-in weight based on whether the ACO has lower or higher spending compared to its regional service area and the ACO's agreement period subject to a regional adjustment as described in § 425.656(d).

• We would continue to apply the 5 percent cap on positive regional adjustments and the −1.5 percent cap and offset factor on negative regional adjustments at the enrollment type level, as finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule and described in § 425.656(c). For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2025, and subsequent performance years, the national assignable fee-for-service population used to calculate the caps would reflect the revised definition of assignable beneficiary that incorporates the expanded window for assignment as proposed in section III.G.3.a of this proposed rule, if finalized.

• After applying the cap and offset factor (if applicable), we would express the regional adjustment as a single per capita value by calculating a person year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment type-specific regional adjustment values.

• If the ACO's regional adjustment amount (expressed as a single per capita value) is positive, the ACO would receive a regional adjustment, according to the approach we finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule. That is, we would apply the enrollment type-specific regional adjustment amounts separately to the historical benchmark expenditures for each Medicare enrollment type. If the ACO is also eligible for a prior savings adjustment, the ACO would receive the higher of the two adjustments. If the regional adjustment amount (expressed as a single per capita value) is higher, we would apply the enrollment type-specific regional adjustment amounts separately to the historical benchmark expenditures for each Medicare enrollment type. If the prior savings adjustment is higher, we would apply the adjustment in the manner finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule as a flat dollar amount applied separately to the historical benchmark expenditures for each Medicare enrollment type.

• If the ACO's regional adjustment amount (expressed as a single per capita value) is negative, the ACO would receive no regional adjustment to its benchmark for any enrollment type. If the ACO is eligible for a prior savings adjustment, it would receive the prior savings adjustment as its final adjustment, without any offsetting reduction for the negative regional adjustment.

Under the proposed approach, ACOs that would face a negative overall adjustment to their benchmark based on the methodology adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule would benefit, as they would now receive no downward adjustment. Additionally, ACOs that have a negative regional adjustment amount (expressed as a single value) and are eligible for prior savings adjustment under the policy adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (§ 425.658) would also be expected to benefit from the proposed policy. Specifically, these ACOs could receive a larger positive adjustment to their benchmark or a positive adjustment instead of a negative adjustment, as we would no longer offset the prior savings amount by the negative regional adjustment amount when determining the final adjustment that would apply to the ACO's benchmark as described in the current regulations in § 425.652(a)(8)(iii)(A). 192 We believe that by increasing the potential benefit of the prior savings adjustment in this manner, our proposed policy would be responsive to the comments discussed in the CY 2023 PFS final rule recommending that CMS make the prior savings adjustment more favorable, particularly for ACOs serving high-risk populations (see 87 FR 69910 through 69914).

192 For examples of the calculation of the final adjustment when an ACO is eligible for a prior savings adjustment and the overall regional adjustment is negative under the policy adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, please refer to Tables 65 and 66 of the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69904 and 69905). In Table 65 the hypothetical ACO receives a positive final adjustment and in Table 66 a negative final adjustment.

Importantly, no ACO would be made worse off under the proposed policy. ACOs that have an overall positive regional adjustment amount would continue to receive the same adjustment to their benchmark as they would under the methodology finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule calculated and applied as described in the current regulations at §§ 425.656 and 425.652(a)(8), respectively. For these ACOs, the regional adjustment would continue to reflect the percentage phase-in weight based on whether the ACO has lower or higher spending compared to its regional service area and the ACO's agreement period subject to a regional adjustment as described in § 425.656(d) and we would continue to allow negative adjustments to be applied at the enrollment type level for those ACOs that receive a positive overall regional adjustment. We believe this is appropriate because these ACOs would continue to receive a positive overall adjustment to their benchmark and thus should already have greater incentive to join or continue participation in the program than ACOs that might otherwise face an adjustment that reduces their benchmark.

Tables 37 and 38 present hypothetical examples to demonstrate how we would determine the final adjustment to an ACO's benchmark under the proposed policy. Both tables include two hypothetical ACOs. The first ACO, ACO A, is the same hypothetical ACO as illustrated in Tables 35 and 36 within this section and has an overall negative regional adjustment. The second ACO, ACO B, has an overall positive regional adjustment. Table 37 assumes that both ACOs are ineligible for a prior savings adjustment, whereas Table 38 shows how the calculation would change if both ACOs were eligible for such an adjustment.

In Table 37, because ACO A had an overall negative regional adjustment and was not eligible for a prior savings adjustment, the ACO ultimately receives no adjustment, upward or downward, to its benchmark. For ACO B, whose overall regional adjustment is positive, the final adjustment is the regional adjustment, which is applied by adding the regional adjustment specific to each enrollment type (reflecting the percentage weight determined for the ACO and after the application of the cap and offset factor, if applicable) to the ACO's pre-adjustment historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type.

In Table 38, both ACO A and ACO B are eligible for a prior savings adjustment. Because ACO A has a negative overall regional adjustment, its final adjustment is automatically set equal to the prior savings adjustment of $58. The adjustment is applied as flat dollar amount by adding the $58 to the ACO's historical benchmark expenditures (row [A]) for each enrollment type. For ACO B, by contrast, the final adjustment is determined by comparing the regional adjustment amount (expressed as a single value) to the prior savings adjustment amount and using the higher of the two. In this case the ACO would receive a final adjustment equal to the prior savings adjustment of $239. Like with ACO A, this would be applied to the ACO's historical benchmark expenditures for each enrollment type as a flat dollar amount.

In revisiting simulations done with PY 2020 data described earlier in this section, there were 36 ACOs (of the 43 ACOs with a negative regional adjustment under the policy with the symmetrical cap) simulated to have a negative overall regional adjustment after the application of the cap and offset factor. Among these, 31 would not have been eligible for a prior savings adjustment and would have had this negative regional adjustment applied to their benchmark under the policy adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule. Under the new proposed policy, these ACOs would receive no adjustment to their benchmark. The average per capita benefit of eliminating the downward adjustment would be $30.

The remaining five ACOs would have been eligible for the prior savings adjustment. These ACOs would have received a positive final adjustment to their benchmark under the methodology adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule but would receive a larger positive adjustment under the new proposed policy, with an average per capita increase of $26. This is because we would no longer be offsetting the prior savings amount by the negative regional adjustment as part of determining the final adjustment to the ACO's benchmark as would happen under the methodology finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule and codified at § 425.652(a)(8)(iii)(A).

In the PY 2022 simulation described earlier in this section, there were 26 ACOs (of the 27 ACOs with a negative regional adjustment under the policy with the symmetrical cap) that would have had a negative regional adjustment, expressed as a single per capita value, after the application of the policy adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule. Among these, 14 ACOs would not have been eligible for a prior savings adjustment and would have their full negative regional adjustment eliminated under the new proposed policy, with an average impact of $66. The remaining 12 ACOs that would have been eligible for a prior savings adjustment would see a larger positive adjustment under the proposed policy, with an average increase of $14.

Overall, we believe that the proposed changes to the calculation and application of the regional adjustment, including its interaction with the prior savings adjustment, would strengthen incentives for participation among ACOs that might otherwise be subject to a downward adjustment to their benchmark due to the negative regional adjustment. The proposed policy, if finalized, would not adversely impact any ACO's benchmark relative to the policy that was finalized in CY 2023 PFS final rule, all else being equal, but would tend to increase benchmarks for ACOs that have historically had higher spending than their regional service area. Based on our simulations using data from PY 2020 and PY 2022, the estimated average increase to the overall benchmark would be between 0.2 and 0.4 percent but could be larger in future years when more ACOs would be subject to higher phase-in weights for calculating the negative regional adjustment that would apply (alone or in combination with the prior savings adjustment) under the policy adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule. ACOs that would benefit from the proposed policy are likely to include those that serve high-cost, medically complex patients or those whose ACO participants have historically been less efficient than their regional counterparts but may have the potential to generate the greatest savings to Medicare through their participation in the Shared Savings Program.

We propose to implement the changes described in this section through revisions to §§ 425.652, 425.656, and 425.658. Specifically, within § 425.652, which is the section that sets forth the methodology for establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, we propose revisions to § 425.652(a)(8). As revised, this provision would describe how we would determine and apply the adjustment to an ACO's benchmark depending on whether the ACO is eligible for a prior savings adjustment and whether the ACO's regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is positive or negative. This provision would also establish that if an ACO is not eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment and has a regional adjustment, expressed as a single value that is negative or zero, the ACO will not receive an adjustment to its benchmark.

We propose to revise § 425.656 (which describes the calculation of the regional adjustment) and § 425.658 (which describes the calculation of the prior savings adjustment) to include certain elements of each calculation that were previously described in § 425.652(a)(8). Specifically, we propose to revise § 425.656 to redesignate paragraphs (d) and (e) as paragraphs (e) and (f) (respectively) and to specify in a new paragraph (d) that we would express the regional adjustment as a single value, and use this value in determining whether a regional adjustment or a prior savings adjustment would be applied to the ACO's benchmark in accordance with § 425.652(a)(8) (as revised under this proposed rule). We also propose modifications to update certain cross-references within § 425.656 for accuracy and consistency with the proposed revisions to the section.

We propose to revise § 425.658 to redesignate paragraph (c) as paragraph (d). We propose to add a new paragraph (c) under § 425.658 specifying that we would calculate the per capita savings adjustment as the lesser of 50 percent of the pro-rated average per capita savings amount (computed as described in § 425.658(b)(3)(ii)) and the cap equal to 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for BY3 expressed as a single value by taking a person-year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment-type specific values. We propose to revise newly redesignated paragraph (d) of § 425.658 to specify CMS would compare the per capita prior savings adjustment with the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value as described in § 425.656(d), to determine the adjustment, if any, that would be applied to the ACO's benchmark in accordance with § 425.652(a)(8).

Additionally, we propose to make the following conforming changes:

• In § 425.600(f)(4)(ii), we propose to remove the reference “425.656(d)” and add in its place the reference “425.656(e)”.

• In § 425.611(c)(2)(iii), we propose to remove the reference “§ 425.652(a)(8)(iv)” and add in its place the reference “§ 425.658(c)(1)(ii)”.

• In § 425.652(a)(9)(v), we propose to remove the wording that references CMS redetermining the adjustment to the benchmark based on “a combination of” the redetermined regional adjustment and the prior savings adjustment.

• In § 425.658(b)(3)(i), which specifies that the ACO is not eligible to receive an adjustment for prior savings if the average per capita amount computed in § 425.658(b)(2) is less than or equal to zero, we propose to remove the sentence: “The ACO will receive the regional adjustment to its benchmark as described in § 425.656.”

We seek comment on these proposed changes.

d. Proposal To Modify the Prior Savings Adjustment

(1) Background

Under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act, an ACO's benchmark must be reset at the start of each agreement period using the most recent available 3 years of expenditures for Parts A and B services for beneficiaries assigned to the ACO. Section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act provides the Secretary with discretion to adjust the historical benchmark by “such other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate.” Pursuant to this authority, as described in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69898 through 69915), we established a prior savings adjustment that will apply when establishing the benchmark for ACOs entering a second agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, or in subsequent years, to account for the average per capita amount of savings generated during the ACO's prior agreement period.

The prior savings adjustment adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule is designed to adjust an ACO's benchmark to account for the average per capita amount of savings generated by the ACO across the 3 performance years prior to the start of its current agreement period for new and renewing ACOs. In the final rule, we explained that reinstituting a prior savings adjustment would be broadly in line with our interest in addressing dynamics to ensure sustainability of the benchmarking methodology. Specifically, such an adjustment would help to mitigate the rebasing ratchet effect on an ACO's benchmark by returning to an ACO's benchmark an amount that reflects its success in lowering growth in expenditures while meeting the program's quality performance standard in the performance years corresponding to the benchmark years for the ACO's new agreement period. We also explained our belief that a prior savings adjustment could help address an ACO's effects on expenditures in its regional service area that result in reducing the regional adjustment added to the historical benchmark.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we explained that, in order to mitigate the potential for rebased benchmarks for ACOs that are lower-spending compared with their regional service area and that achieved savings in the benchmark period to become overinflated, we believed that adjusting an ACO's benchmark based on the higher of either the prior savings adjustment or the ACO's positive regional adjustment would be appropriate. Additionally, we believed it would be appropriate to use a prior savings adjustment to offset negative regional adjustments for ACOs that are higher spending compared to their regional service area. We noted that this would permit ACOs that are subject to a negative regional adjustment, but that have generated savings in prior years, to receive a relatively higher benchmark.

Under the methodology finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule and codified at § 425.658 of the regulations, the prior savings adjustment that will apply in the establishment of benchmarks for renewing ACOs and re-entering ACOs entering an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, is calculated as follows:

• Step 1: Calculate total per capita savings or losses in each performance year that constitutes a benchmark year for the current agreement period. For each performance year we will determine an average per capita amount reflecting the quotient of the ACO's total updated benchmark expenditures minus total performance year expenditures divided by performance year assigned beneficiary person years. CMS will apply the following requirements in determining the amount of per capita savings or losses for each performance year:

++ The per capita savings or losses will be set to zero for a performance year if the ACO was not reconciled for the performance year.

++ If an ACO generated savings for a performance year but was not eligible to receive a shared savings payment for that year due to noncompliance with Shared Savings Program requirements, the per capita savings for that year will be set to zero.

++ For a new ACO that is identified as a re-entering ACO, per capita savings or losses will be determined based on the per capita savings or losses of the ACO in which the majority of the ACO participants in the re-entering ACO were participating.

• Step 2: Calculate average per capita savings. Calculate an average per capita amount of savings by taking a simple average of the values for each of the 3 performance years as determined in Step 1, including values of zero, if applicable. CMS will use the average per capita amount of savings to determine the ACO's eligibility for the prior savings adjustment as follows:

++ If the average per capita value is less than or equal to zero, the ACO will not be eligible for a prior savings adjustment. The ACO will receive the regional adjustment to its benchmark.

++ If the average per capita value is positive, the ACO will be eligible for a prior savings adjustment.

• Step 3: Apply a proration factor to the per capita savings calculated in Step 2 equal to the ratio of the average person years for the 3 performance years that immediately precede the start of the ACO's current agreement period (regardless of whether these 3 performance years fall in one or more prior agreement periods), and the average person years in benchmark years for the ACO's current agreement period, capped at 1. If the ACO was not reconciled for one or more of the 3 years preceding the start of the ACO's current agreement period, the person years from that year (or years) will be excluded from the averages in the numerator and the denominator of this ratio. For a new ACO that is identified as a re-entering ACO, the person years of the ACO in which the majority of the ACO participants of the re-entering ACO were participating will be used in the numerator of the calculation. This ratio will be redetermined for each performance year during the agreement period in the event of any changes to the number of average person years in the benchmark years as a result of changes to the ACO's certified ACO participant list, a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection, or changes to the beneficiary assignment methodology.

• Step 4: Determine final adjustment to benchmark. Compare the pro-rated positive average per capita savings from Step 3 with the ACO's regional adjustment, determined as specified in the regulation at § 425.656, expressed as a single per capita value by taking a person-year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment type-specific regional adjustment values.

++ If the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is negative or zero, calculate the sum of the regional adjustment value and the pro-rated positive average per capita savings value and determine the final adjustment as follows:

-- If the sum is positive, the ACO will receive a prior savings adjustment in place of the negative regional adjustment equal to the lesser of 50 percent of the sum of the pro-rated average per capita savings and the regional adjustment and 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3. The adjustment will be applied as a flat dollar amount to the historical benchmark expenditures for each of the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

--If this sum is negative, this will constitute the amount of the negative regional adjustment applied to the ACO's historical benchmark. The adjustment will be applied as a flat dollar amount to the historical benchmark expenditures for the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

++ If the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is positive, the ACO will receive an adjustment to the benchmark equal to the higher of the following:

-- The positive regional adjustment amount. The adjustment will be applied separately to the historical benchmark expenditures for each of the following populations of beneficiaries in accordance with § 425.656(c): ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

-- A prior savings adjustment equal to the lesser of 50 percent of the pro-rated positive average per capita savings value and 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for Parts A and B services in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3. The adjustment will be applied as a flat dollar amount to the historical benchmark expenditures for each of the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

As we explained in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69900) in calculating an ACO's average per capita prior savings over the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of its agreement period, we believe that a safeguard is needed to ensure that ACOs that achieved savings for a performance year that serves as a benchmark year for the current agreement period, but were ineligible to receive a shared savings payment due to noncompliance with Shared Savings Program requirements, are not subsequently eligible to have a portion of those savings included in their historical benchmark. Without such a safeguard, we would be rewarding an ACO, despite its noncompliance, through a higher benchmark in its subsequent agreement period. This would conflict with the sanction imposed on the ACO for its noncompliance during the performance year(s) of its prior agreement period. Accordingly, under the prior savings adjustment policy we finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, if an ACO was ineligible to share in savings for any performance year in the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of its agreement period due to noncompliance with Shared Savings Program requirements, we will set at zero the per capita amount of savings for the affected performance year(s) when calculating the prior savings adjustment.

There are a variety of reasons that could result in an ACO's ineligibility to receive a shared savings payment due to noncompliance. In accordance with §§ 425.605(c)(2), and 425.610(c)(2), an ACO does not qualify to receive shared savings for a performance year if it failed to meet the quality performance standard as specified under § 425.512 or otherwise did not maintain its eligibility to participate in the Shared Savings Program. Furthermore, an ACO will not receive any shared savings payments during the time it is under a corrective action plan (CAP) for avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries and is not eligible to receive shared savings for the performance year attributable to the time that necessitated the CAP (the time period during which the ACO avoided at-risk beneficiaries) (refer to § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) and (C)).

In the CY 2023 PFS rulemaking to establish the current prior savings adjustment, we did not describe how we would account for certain circumstances where there could be changes to the values used in calculating the prior savings adjustment. Such changes could occur as a result of changes in savings earned by ACOs in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) as a result of a compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or issuance of a revised initial determination of financial performance under § 425.315. If CMS determines that an ACO, its ACO participants, any ACO providers/suppliers, or other individuals or entities performing functions or services related to the ACO's activities avoids at-risk beneficiaries and requires the ACO to submit a CAP, the ACO will not receive any shared savings payments during the time it is under the CAP (§ 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B)), and it will not at any time be eligible to receive shared savings for the performance year attributable to the time that necessitated the CAP (§ 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(C)). Upon completion of an ACO's CAP for avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, CMS may release shared savings payments withheld from an ACO during the time it was under a CAP under § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B), so long as the shared savings are not attributable to the time that necessitated the CAP (that is, the time period during which the ACO avoided at-risk beneficiaries). Thus, depending on the timing of compliance actions undertaken by CMS, the amount of savings eligible for inclusion in the prior savings adjustment under § 425.658(b)(1), may change as a result of the compliance action. For instance, the total savings eligible for inclusion in the prior savings adjustment may increase after the completion of a CAP and release of shared savings payment withheld under § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B). Further, if an initial determination of financial performance was already made and shared savings payments distributed and then the ACO was found to have avoided at-risk beneficiaries and therefore ineligible to receive a shared savings payment for the performance year, CMS would recoup the shared savings for the time period during which the ACO avoided at-risk beneficiaries. This latter scenario would result in a decrease in the total amount of savings eligible for inclusion in the prior savings adjustment calculation.

Further, if CMS determines that the amount of shared savings due to the ACO or the amount of shared losses owed by the ACO has been calculated in error, under § 425.315 CMS may reopen its prior determination and issue a revised initial determination: (1) at any time in the case of fraud or similar fault as defined in § 405.902; or (2) not later than 4 years after the date of the notification to the ACO of the initial determination of savings or losses for the relevant performance year, for good cause. If these situations—changes in the amount of shared savings for a prior performance year under § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) as a result of a compliance action due to the avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, or the issuance of a revised initial determination based on a reopening of ACO shared savings or shared losses under § 425.315—impact one of the 3 years prior to the start of the ACO's current agreement period, it is possible that the prior savings adjustment would no longer reflect the savings or losses achieved by the ACO during the applicable years. In the CY 2023 PFS rulemaking we did not adopt a mechanism to account for these changes in the prior savings adjustment, but rather focused on changes to the prior savings adjustment related to changes in an ACO's participant list, changes to the ACO's assignment methodology selection, or changes to beneficiary assignment methodology under the Shared Savings Program as a whole.

(2) Proposed Revisions

We are proposing refinements to the prior savings adjustment calculation methodology, specified in 42 CFR part 425, subpart G, that would apply in the establishment of benchmarks for renewing ACOs and re-entering ACOs entering an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, to account for circumstances where the amount of savings or losses for a performance year used in the prior savings adjustment calculation changes retroactively. Specifically, we are proposing to modify the list of circumstances for adjusting the historical benchmark in § 425.652(a)(9) to include two additional scenarios: a change in savings earned by an ACO in a benchmark year in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, or a change in the amount of savings or losses for a benchmark year as a result of a reopening of a prior determination of ACO shared savings or shared losses and the issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315. In these situations, the amount of savings or losses that an ACO may have generated in the 3 performance years prior to the start of the current agreement period and that would have been eligible for inclusion in the calculation of the prior savings adjustment may change. The refinements we are proposing would allow for the prior savings adjustment to be recalculated and the historical benchmark to be adjusted to reflect the any change in the amount of savings earned or losses incurred by the ACO in the 3 performance years prior to its current agreement period that are eligible for inclusion in the calculation of the prior savings adjustment.

We are proposing to modify the process currently described in § 425.652(a)(9) for adjusting the historical benchmark. Currently, an ACO may receive an adjusted historical benchmark because of changes in the ACO's assigned beneficiary population in the benchmark years of the ACO's current agreement period due to the addition and removal of ACO participants or ACO providers/suppliers in accordance with § 425.118(b), a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection under § 425.226(a)(1), 193 or changes to the beneficiary assignment methodology specified in 42 CFR part 425, subpart E. We are proposing to modify § 425.652(a)(9) to indicate that an ACO would receive an adjusted historical benchmark for changes in values used in benchmark calculations in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315. More specifically, an ACO would receive an adjusted benchmark for the following reasons: (1) a change in the amount of savings calculated for any of an ACO's three benchmark years eligible for inclusion in the prior savings adjustment in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action taken to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, or (2) CMS issues a revised initial determination under § 425.315 that impacts the amount of savings or losses calculated for one of the ACO's benchmark years. We note that a compliance action taken to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries may lead to a change in the amount of savings earned by an ACO for a previous performance year when CMS releases savings previously withheld under § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) for a time period other than the time period during which the ACO avoided at-risk beneficiaries following completion of a CAP or CMS recoups shared savings previously disbursed to an ACO under § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(C) for a time period during which the ACO is later determined to have avoided at-risk beneficiaries.

193 Refer to section III.G.7.a of this proposed rule for the proposal to revise the current reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) in § 425.652(a)(9)(iv) to a reference to § 425.226(a)(1).

Only ACOs whose current benchmark includes a prior savings adjustment or whose benchmark would include an adjustment for prior savings following a change in the amount of savings earned for a previous performance year that is a benchmark year for the ACO's current agreement period would receive an adjusted benchmark under these proposed changes. Furthermore, we propose to modify the process currently described in § 425.652(a)(9) to indicate that if either of these two conditions occur after the ACO has already received its historical benchmark for the first performance year of its agreement period, an ACO could receive an adjusted historical benchmark for the first year of its agreement period.

We are also proposing to add a new paragraph (e) to § 425.658 to indicate that, when either of the two aforementioned scenarios occurs, the prior savings adjustment itself would be recalculated. Without this addition there is currently no mechanism for recalculating the prior savings adjustment to address changes in ACO's savings or losses for a performance year within an agreement period. Further, we are proposing that, absent any other triggers for receiving an adjusted benchmark, an ACO would only receive an adjusted historical benchmark due to a change in the ACO's savings or losses for a performance year under §§ 425.315 or 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) if the change would result in a change to the prior savings adjustment as determined under § 425.652(a)(8). In other words, the ACO would not receive an adjusted historical benchmark following recalculation of the prior savings adjustment if the recalculation of the prior savings adjustment would not result in a change to the historical benchmark.

We believe that, in order to issue adjusted benchmarks and complete financial reconciliation in a timely fashion, a need exists to establish a timing cutoff for when the determination to issue an adjusted historical benchmark for these two additional reasons would be made. Each of the two scenarios for which we are proposing to recalculate the prior savings adjustment may occur at any point during any performance year of the ACO's agreement period as well as after the end of that agreement period. We are proposing that for an adjusted benchmark due to the two conditions being considered to be used in financial reconciliation for a performance year, any determination that changes the amount of the ACO's savings or losses in any of the benchmark years under §§ 425.315 or 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) must be issued no later than the date of the initial determination of shared savings or shared losses through financial reconciliation for the relevant performance year under § 425.605(e) or § 425.610(h). Note that if we are aware of a potential change under § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) in the savings earned in a benchmark year by an ACO eligible for the prior savings adjustment or an upcoming revised initial determination under § 425.315 that could impact the determination of the ACO's savings or losses for a benchmark year, we may delay the initial determination of shared savings or shared losses for the ACO for the relevant performance year beyond when initial determinations would otherwise be issued in order to assess whether the ACO should receive an adjusted historical benchmark. Under this framework, changes to savings or losses for a benchmark year that are finalized after notification to the ACO of the initial determination of shared savings or shared losses for a given performance year would be reflected in the adjusted benchmark applied to the subsequent performance year during the relevant agreement period but would not be retroactively applied to completed performance years in the agreement period.

We considered several alternatives to the timing of when we could incorporate new information about a change in savings earned by an ACO in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) or a revised initial determination under § 425.315 into the prior savings adjustment. The two primary alternatives we considered were: (1) requiring information about a change to the amount of savings calculated for a previous year in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) or a revised initial determination under § 425.315 to become available by December 31st of the year prior to the performance year; and (2) considering this information at any time it becomes available. An advantage of the former option of requiring information by December 31st is that it would allow us to issue the adjusted benchmark in March of the performance year, consistent with when adjusted benchmarks are otherwise issued to ACOs. A disadvantage of this approach is that it would provide less flexibility for when new information impacting savings or losses in the benchmark years could be applied to the benchmark used in financial reconciliation for a given performance year. An advantage of the latter approach of considering such information at any time that it becomes available is that an ACO could receive an adjusted benchmark and a revised initial determination of shared savings or shared losses even after receiving its initial determination for a performance year. However, a disadvantage of this approach is that it would generate significant operational complexities. If, for instance, information becomes available during performance year four of an ACO's agreement period that would potentially impact financial reconciliation results in the first 3 performance years of the agreement period, we would need to simultaneously issue adjusted benchmarks and revised initial determinations for several performance years. On balance, we believe it would be appropriate to consider new information that could impact the prior savings adjustment up to the point at which an ACO receives its initial determination for a particular performance year. We note that we are continuing to consider the complexities surrounding reopening initial determinations for multiple prior performance years throughout the program's benchmarking and financial reconciliation methodologies and may address this issue in future rulemaking.

We recognize that under § 425.658(b)(1)(iii), for a new ACO identified as re-entering ACO, the prior savings adjustment is based on the prior savings or losses of the ACO in which the majority of the ACO's ACO participants were participating. Accordingly, in the case of a re-entering ACO, we propose to consider whether this prior ACO is impacted by the following when determining whether to issue an adjusted benchmark: (1) a change in the amount of savings calculated for any of the ACO's benchmark years eligible for inclusion in the prior savings adjustment in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries; or (2) a revised initial determination issued under § 425.315 that impacts the determination of the ACO's savings or losses for one of the benchmark years. In this case, other aspects of this proposal would apply similarly, including the timing cutoff for issuing an adjusted benchmark and issuing an adjusted benchmark only if the change in savings or losses determined for the applicable benchmark year would result in a change to the prior savings adjustment as determined under § 425.652(a)(8).

Below are two examples that illustrate how an ACO could receive an adjusted historical benchmark that incorporates additional savings as a result of the changes we are proposing.

• Example 1: An ACO renews to begin a new agreement period on January 1, 2025 but is under a corrective action plan under § 425.316(b) for avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries during performance year 2023. In accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) the ACO did not receive a shared savings payment for performance year 2024, which represents the third benchmark year of its new agreement period. Therefore, the ACO's prior savings adjustment for its new agreement period would be calculated by setting the gross savings and losses for the third benchmark year equal to 0 as described in § 425.658(b)(1)(ii). However, in November of 2026 the corrective action plan for avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries is closed and CMS determines that the ACO is eligible to receive payment for shared savings for performance year 2024. In this example, the ACO would have previously received notification of the initial determination of shared savings or shared losses for performance year 2025. Because the change in the status of the corrective action plan occurred after the ACO received its initial determination of shared savings and shared losses for performance year 2025, savings from the ACO's third benchmark year would be included in the calculation of the prior savings adjustment beginning with the benchmark used to determine financial performance for performance year 2026. That is, the ACO would receive an adjusted historical benchmark for performance year 2026 reflecting the recalculated prior savings adjustment, and financial reconciliation for performance year 2026 and subsequent performance years of the ACO's current agreement period would reflect that adjusted historical benchmark. However, financial reconciliation for performance year 2025 would not be reopened to reflect savings from the third benchmark year in the calculation of the prior savings adjustment because the corrective action plan was not lifted until after the ACO received its initial determination of shared savings or shared losses for that performance year.

• Example 2: An ACO begins a new agreement period on January 1, 2026, and receives its historical benchmark, which includes a prior savings adjustment. In February of 2027, information is identified that leads to a revised initial determination of shared savings and shared losses for benchmark year 2 of the ACO's new agreement period. Because the issue was identified in February of the second performance year of the new agreement period, which is prior to the ACO receiving an initial determination of its shared savings and shared losses for performance year 2026, the ACO would receive an adjusted historical benchmark for performance year 2026. Shared savings and shared losses calculations for performance year 2026 would reflect the recalculated prior savings adjustment included in this adjusted benchmark. All subsequent performance years in the agreement period would also reflect the recalculated prior savings adjustment.

In summary, we are proposing revisions to § 425.652(a)(9) to indicate that we would adjust the benchmark for changes in values used in benchmark calculations in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of the issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315. We are also proposing to add new paragraph (e) to § 425.658 to specify that the ACO's prior savings adjustment is recalculated for changes to the ACO's savings or losses for a performance year used in the prior savings adjustment calculation in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315. Further, the new provision § 425.658(e) would also establish that for new re-entering ACOs, the prior savings adjustment will be recalculated for changes in savings or losses for a performance year used in the prior savings adjustment for the ACO in which a majority of the new ACO's ACO participants were previously participating.

We seek comment on this proposal to adjust the historical benchmark to reflect changes in savings or losses for a performance year that constitutes a benchmark year for an ACO's current agreement period. These changes would be applicable for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024.

e. Proposal To Update How Benchmarks Are Risk Adjusted

(1) Overview of Risk Adjustment Within Shared Savings Program Benchmark Calculations

When establishing, adjusting, and updating an ACO's historical benchmark, CMS makes certain adjustments to account for the severity and case mix of, and certain demographic factors for, the ACO's assigned beneficiary population and the assignable beneficiary population. We use prospective HCC risk scores and (as applicable) demographic risk scores to perform this risk adjustment.

To follow is a summary of the calculations in which we will account for the severity and case mix of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population or the assignable beneficiary population when establishing, adjusting, and updating the historical benchmark, for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, including as proposed elsewhere in this proposed rule.

• We risk adjust benchmark year expenditures used to establish the historical benchmark for changes in severity and case mix using prospective HCC risk scores, in accordance with § 425.652(a)(3). In making this adjustment, we account for changes in severity and case mix in the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between the first and third benchmark years and between the second and third benchmark years. 194

194 See, for example, Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications (version #11, January 2023), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-2 (see section 3.6, “Risk Adjustment Policies”).

• We calculate the ACO's regional FFS expenditures using risk adjusted county-level FFS expenditures, which are determined in accordance with § 425.654(a)(4) by adjusting FFS expenditures for severity and case mix of assignable beneficiaries in the county using prospective HCC risk scores and by making separate expenditure calculations for populations of beneficiaries by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries). The ACO's risk adjusted regional FFS expenditures are utilized in determining the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark (in accordance with § 425.656), the regional component of the national-regional blended trend factor (in accordance with § 425.652(a)(5)), and the regional component of the three-way blended benchmark update factor (in accordance with § 425.652(b)(2)).

• We calculate the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark in accordance with § 425.656, including the following calculations to account for severity and case mix:

++ We adjust for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for BY3 and the assignable population of beneficiaries for the ACO's regional service area for BY3 in accordance with § 425.656(b)(3).

++ In calculating the negative regional adjustment, we apply an offset factor based on the ACO's overall proportion of BY3 assigned beneficiaries who are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid (including dually eligible ESRD, disabled, and aged beneficiaries) and the ACO's weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 taken across the four Medicare enrollment types, in accordance with § 425.656(c)(4).

• We adjust the ACO's historical benchmark to account for changes in severity and case mix in the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year in accordance with §§ 425.652(a)(10), 425.605(a)(1) and (2) (BASIC track), and 425.610(a)(2) and (3) (ENHANCED track), at the time of financial reconciliation for a performance year. We use prospective HCC risk scores to adjust the historical benchmark for changes in severity and case mix for all assigned beneficiaries between BY3 and the performance year, with positive adjustments subject to a cap equal to the ACO's aggregate growth in demographic risk scores between BY3 and the performance year plus 3 percentage points (refer to §§ 425.605(a)(1)(ii) and 425.610(a)(2)(ii), and section III.G.4.b.(1) of this proposed rule).

• In calculating the regional component of the three-way blended update factor, we are proposing to cap prospective HCC risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area between BY3 and the performance year by applying an adjustment factor, as discussed in section III.G.4.b.(2) of this proposed rule and the proposed new provision at § 425.655.

• We adjust the flat dollar amounts of the ACPT component of the three-way blended update factor for each performance year, for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's BY3 assigned beneficiary population and the national assignable FFS population for each Medicare enrollment type identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3, in accordance with § 425.660(b)(4).

(2) Background on Calculation of Prospective HCC Risk Scores Used To Risk Adjust Shared Savings Program Benchmark Calculations

(a) Historical Practices

We have detailed how CMS performs Shared Savings Program risk adjustment calculations in programmatic material, including publicly available specifications documents. See, for example, Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications (version #11, January 2023), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-2 (see section 3.6, “Risk Adjustment Policies”). While we have specified the details of these practices in guidance, we have not previously codified these practices in regulation.

More generally, CMS maintains the CMS-HCC risk adjustment models for the Medicare Advantage (MA) program. CMS maintains CMS-HCC risk adjustment models for populations of beneficiaries based on age, disability status, gender, institutional status, eligibility for Medicaid, and health status (see section 1853(a)(1)(C)(i) of the Act), including a separate MA risk adjustment model for the ESRD population, and a Part D risk adjustment model (known as the RxHCC model). Over time, CMS has implemented revised versions of the CMS-HCC risk adjustment models (also referred to generally as the “CMS-HCC model”). Historically, transitions to a revised version of the CMS-HCC model have been gradually phased-in over time by blending the old risk adjustment model and the revised risk adjustment model. CMS specifies the CMS-HCC risk adjustment models applicable for a calendar year in the annual MA Rate Announcement (see sections 1853(a)(1)(C) and (b)(1) of the Act). Prior to doing so, CMS solicits comment on the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology (see section 1853(b)(2) of the Act). Using the specified model, or blend of models (if applicable), CMS calculates prospective HCC risk scores for all Medicare beneficiaries, including FFS beneficiaries. These prospective HCC risk scores are then used to set MA capitation rates and Part C and D payment policies for the applicable calendar year.

To perform risk adjustment calculations for the Shared Savings Program, we calculate prospective HCC risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for the relevant benchmark year or performance year. In doing so, we use the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) that are applicable for the particular calendar year corresponding to the benchmark or performance year to identify a Medicare FFS beneficiary's prospective HCC risk score for that benchmark or performance year. Prospective HCC risk scores used in financial calculations for the Shared Savings Program have the MA coding pattern adjustment of 5.90 percent removed, if applicable. 195 Additionally, all prospective HCC risk scores are renormalized by Medicare enrollment type based on a national assignable FFS population to ensure that the mean risk score among assignable beneficiaries is equal to one. Renormalization helps to ensure consistency in risk scores from year to year, given changes made to the underlying risk score models. All risk adjustment calculations for the Shared Savings Program, including risk score renormalization, are performed separately for each Medicare enrollment type for the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, aged/non-dual eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. 196

195 The MA risk adjustment models used for beneficiaries classified as ESRD for the Shared Savings Program (that is, beneficiaries in long-term dialysis or transplant status, no more than three months post-graft) do not currently employ a coding intensity adjustment, therefore no adjustment is currently removed from risk scores for beneficiaries in the ESRD enrollment type.

196 A beneficiary's final risk score for each month is the risk score determined for that beneficiary based on the beneficiary's risk adjustment model status for that month. There are risk adjustment models for MA subpopulations (for example, community model versus institutional model versus new enrollee model for aged/non-dual eligible beneficiaries), and the risk scores used by the Shared Savings Program for beneficiaries in a Medicare enrollment type may be derived from more than one risk adjustment model.

Under the Shared Savings Program, we calculate demographic only risk scores using a separate model than those used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores. For agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024 and subsequent years, CMS will use demographic risk scores to determine the cap on risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year. Demographic risk scores consider only certain specified patient demographic factors, such as age, sex, Medicaid status, and the basis for Medicare entitlement (that is, age, disability, or ESRD), without incorporating diagnostic information. As such, demographic risk scores are not subject to changes in coding intensity or coding accuracy in the same way that prospective HCC risk scores are. We note that while the Shared Savings Program uses the same demographic factors as those used in MA, Shared Savings Program demographic factor coefficients are calibrated based on the entire Medicare FFS population instead of new Medicare enrollees as is used by MA.

Currently, when establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark, we account for changes in severity and case mix between benchmark years or between BY3 and the performance year by multiplying the expenditures for the applicable year by a quotient of two ACO-level renormalized risk scores, known as the risk ratio. For example, to risk adjust the expenditures for an ACO's assigned beneficiary population to account for changes in case mix and severity from the first benchmark year to the third, we multiply BY1 expenditures by a risk ratio equal to the mean renormalized risk score among the ACO's assigned beneficiaries in BY3 divided by the mean renormalized risk score among the ACO's assigned beneficiaries in BY1 for each Medicare enrollment type. For instance, a one percent rate of growth in renormalized risk scores between these benchmark years would be expressed by a risk ratio of 1.010. This ratio reflects growth in risk for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population relative to that of the national assignable population. Because the risk ratios used in benchmarking calculations may be determined using risk scores calculated from different underlying CMS-HCC risk adjustment models, depending on the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) applicable to the corresponding benchmark or performance year, this approach allows for the possibility that differences in risk models between the benchmark years and the performance year could impact an ACO's financial performance.

Since the inception of the Shared Savings Program in 2012, there have been several CMS-HCC model changes. Several factors reduce the impact of using different risk adjustment models to calculate prospective HCC risk scores for benchmark and performance years when performing Shared Savings Program risk adjustment calculations. One factor is that the Shared Savings Program renormalizes prospective HCC risk scores by Medicare enrollment type, which ensures that the mean risk score for the national assignable FFS population for each enrollment type is equal to one. If a new CMS-HCC model leads to a shift in the mean of the distribution of prospective HCC risk scores for the national assignable FFS population for a particular Medicare enrollment type, then renormalizing the risk scores would counterbalance this effect. Because renormalization factors are calculated across the assignable beneficiary population for each enrollment type, any adverse or beneficial impact for an ACO from a change in CMS-HCC model would derive from the mean risk score for the ACO's assigned beneficiaries within a given enrollment type being impacted in a systematically different way than the mean for the national assignable population for that enrollment type.

A second factor is that risk scores are used in multiple ways that balance their effects when establishing, adjusting or updating a benchmark. Risk scores are used to adjust ACO expenditures and also to adjust regional expenditures used in calculating the regional adjustment to the benchmark and regional growth rates in benchmark calculations. Any impact of a new CMS-HCC model that could increase or decrease an ACO's risk scores used to establish, adjust or update a benchmark may differ directionally from the impact that risk scores for the assignable FFS population in an ACO's regional service area might have on risk-adjusted regional expenditure calculations. For example, if a new CMS-HCC model lowers the risk ratio between BY3 and the PY and therefore lowers the benchmark for an ACO, all else equal, then the new risk adjustment model may also lower the risk scores for the ACO's regional service area assignable beneficiary population, which would increase risk-adjusted regional expenditures. 197 This would put upward pressure on the benchmark by increasing the regional update factor. Any changes to the ACO's risk ratio may be thus reduced by changes to the ACO's regional update factor. This would reduce the impact of CMS-HCC model changes on ACO financial performance.

197 For each county and Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, and aged/non-dual eligible) in the ACO's regional service area, CMS divides average per capita county-level FFS expenditures by the county average renormalized CMS-HCC risk score to obtain risk-adjusted county expenditures.

A third factor is that CMS-HCC model transitions have been gradually phased-in over time by blending the old risk adjustment model and the new risk adjustment model, thereby constraining the magnitude of any change in risk ratios resulting from differences in the risk adjustment models used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores. That is, as a result of this blending, the risk ratios used to adjust expenditures between BY3 and the PY may have some degree of overlap in underlying risk adjustment models used to calculate both the numerator and denominator of the risk ratios.

(b) Introduction of the 2024 CMS-HCC Risk Adjustment Model, Version 28

On March 31, 2023, CMS released the Announcement of CY 2024 MA Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment Policies, 198 which finalized the transition to a revised CMS-HCC risk adjustment model. The revised 2024 CMS-HCC risk adjustment model, Version 28 (V28), has the same structure as the 2020 CMS-HCC risk adjustment model currently used for payment in that it has eight model segments as first implemented for payment for CY 2017 and condition count variables as first implemented for payment for CY 2020. It incorporates the following technical updates: (1) updated data years used for model calibration, (2) updated denominator year used in determining the average per capita predicted expenditures to create relative factors in the model, and (3) a clinical reclassification of the hierarchical condition categories (HCCs) using the International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM) codes. In addition, as part of the clinical reclassification, CMS conducted an assessment on conditions that are coded more frequently in MA relative to FFS. This assessment is consistent with Principle 10 of CMS's longstanding model principles, described in more detail initially in the December 2000 report titled, “Diagnostic Cost Group Hierarchical Condition Category Models for Medicare Risk Adjustment (Final Report)” (available at https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Reports/downloads/pope_2000_2.pdf ). As a result of this assessment, in addition to the technical updates, the revised model includes additional constraints and the removal of several HCCs in order to reduce the impact on risk score variation in coding between MA and FFS. 199

198 For more details, refer to Announcement of Calendar Year (CY) 2024 Medicare Advantage (MA) Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment Policies (March 31, 2023) (herein CY 2024 Rate Announcement), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2024-announcement-pdf.pdf .

199 See Advance Notice of Methodological Changes for Calendar Year (CY) 2024 for Medicare Advantage (MA) Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment Policies (February 1, 2023), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2024-advance-notice-pdf.pdf.

For CY 2024, MA risk scores will be calculated as a blend of 67 percent of the risk scores calculated under the 2020 CMS-HCC risk adjustment model, Version 24 (V24), and 33 percent of the risk scores calculated with the 2024 CMS-HCC risk adjustment model (V28). CMS expects that for CY 2025, MA risk scores will be calculated using a blend of 33 percent of the risk scores calculated with V24 and 67 percent of the risk scores calculated with V28, and for CY 2026, 100 percent of risk scores will be calculated with V28. 200

200 See CY 2024 Rate Announcement, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2024-announcement-pdf.pdf at 3.

With the transition to the use of the V28 CMS-HCC model beginning in CY 2024 in MA, it is timely to revisit how we apply the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) to calculate risk scores used in Shared Savings Program calculations. As summarized in the CY 2024 Rate Announcement, some commenters questioned if the updated MA risk adjustment model will affect lines of business outside of Medicare Advantage such as the ACO REACH Model and Medicare Shared Savings Program. In response to these comments, we explained that we were considering the implications of these changes to the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model for these initiatives. 201

201 See id. at 97.

In section III.G.4.e.(3) of this proposed rule, we discuss our initial analysis of the impact of the V28 CMS-HCC model on Shared Savings Program calculations, including modeling of an alternative approach to calculating benchmark year risk scores. We propose a modified approach to making such calculations for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, in section III.G.4.e.(4) of this proposed rule.

(3) Initial Analysis of the Impact of Risk Adjustment Model Changes on Shared Savings Program Calculations and Modeling of an Alternative Approach to Calculating Benchmark Year Risk Scores

To further evaluate the potential impact of the V28 CMS-HCC model transition on Shared Savings Program ACOs, we analyzed the following:

• Our current approach in which we apply the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) applicable for a particular calendar year to calculate a Medicare FFS beneficiary's prospective HCC risk score for the corresponding benchmark or performance year. This approach could lead to different CMS-HCC risk adjustment models being used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores for the benchmark years as compared to a particular performance year of the ACO's agreement period when there is a transition to a new CMS-HCC risk adjustment model between one or more benchmark years and the performance year.

• An alternative approach in which we would use the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) applicable to the calendar year corresponding to the performance year to calculate a Medicare FFS beneficiary's prospective HCC risk score for the performance year, and for each benchmark year of the ACO's agreement period. 202 This approach ensures consistency between the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology used to calculate the prospective HCC risk scores for the benchmark years relative to a particular performance year.

202 A similar approach was suggested by commenters in earlier rulemaking for the Shared Savings Program. See, for example, the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68013), in which we summarize commenters' recommendation that CMS modify the current methodology to use the same CMS-HCC risk score model to calculate risk scores for both the benchmark years and the performance year.

To conduct this analysis, we calculated prospective HCC risk scores and risk ratios for CY 2018 (treated as BY3) and CY 2021 (treated as the PY) for all 275 ACOs that participated in both PY 2018 and PY 2021. Risk ratios between BY3 and the PY were calculated under the current approach, in which we used the V24 CMS-HCC model to calculate BY3 prospective HCC risk scores and the V28 CMS-HCC model to calculate PY prospective HCC risk scores, and under the alternative approach of calculating both BY and PY prospective HCC risk scores using V28. 203

203 The V24 CMS-HCC model was not applicable to CY 2018 but was used in this analysis to calculate BY3 prospective HCC risk scores under the current approach in order to measure the impact of the transition from V24 to V28 on Shared Savings Program ACOs.

CMS performed this analysis to roughly estimate how V28 would have impacted payment to ACOs in PY 2021 using weighted average risk scores calculated across the three non-ESRD Medicare enrollment types (disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible). The analysis provides insight into the impact of a fully phased-in V28, which is expected to occur in PY 2026 (particularly for ACOs that would at that point have a BY3 prior to 2024). For the 275 ACOs in the sample, combined PY 2021 shared savings payments would have been about 11 percent lower than actual payments if V28 had been fully phased-in for the performance year, when using V24 to calculate BY3 prospective HCC risk scores (reflecting the current approach to applying CMS-HCC risk adjustment models). Alternatively, combined shared savings payments would have been about 2 percent higher than actual if V28 were used for BY3 calculations as well as for PY 2021 calculations (reflecting the alternative approach to applying CMS-HCC risk adjustment models).

Table 39 compares the estimated impact on PY 2021 shared savings of the current approach, and the alternative approach to calculating BY3 and PY prospective HCC risk scores.

Estimated decreases in PY 2021 shared savings payments are more extreme at the tail of the distribution when using the current approach. Over 10 percent of ACOs showed more than 1.4 percent in reduced shared savings payments relative to benchmark under the modeling of the current approach, in which we used V24 to calculate BY3 prospective HCC risk scores and V28 to calculate PY prospective HCC risk scores. In contrast, about 3 percent of ACOs showed declines of such magnitude in shared savings payments relative to the benchmark using the alternative approach to calculating prospective HCC risk scores for BY3 and PY 2021 with the V28 CMS-HCC model. Compared to the alternative approach, the current approach is estimated to result in a reduction in shared savings of about 0.2 percent per ACO on average, relative to benchmark. These impacts would be smaller, potentially one-third of the magnitude, if the use of V24 in BY3 was compared to the blend of 33 percent V28 and 67 percent V24 for the PY (reflecting the blend applicable for CY 2024).

Table 40 compares the estimated impact on PY 2021 shared savings of the current approach, and the alternative approach to calculating BY3 and PY risk scores (expressed as percentage of benchmark), based on the following ACO characteristics: ACO average renormalized prospective HCC risk scores for aged/disabled beneficiaries, ACO participation in performance-based risk, and year of entry into the Shared Savings Program. We observed that the current approach would have the greatest adverse effect on ACOs with the highest average risk scores (calculated with the V24 CMS-HCC model), ACOs participating in two-sided models, and ACOs that have been in the Shared Savings Program longer. ACOs that would not have been harmed by the current approach had an average renormalized risk score for their non-ESRD populations roughly equal to 1.00. The 5 percent of ACOs in the modeling with the most adverse impact from the current approach had an average renormalized risk score for their non-ESRD populations of 1.22. For ACOs with the highest average risk scores, the modeling showed the current approach would have resulted in reduced shared savings of about 2 percent (relative to benchmark) per ACO, as compared to the alternative approach. The most adversely impacted ACOs in the modeling also were roughly 40 percent more likely to participate in a two-sided model and to have participated in the Shared Savings Program nearly 2 years longer than ACOs not harmed. The modeling demonstrates that the alternative approach would reduce the negative impact that the current approach shows for ACOs with high risk scores, with earlier entry dates into the Shared Savings Program, and with participation in a two-sided model.

In the context of the transition to the V28 CMS-HCC model, the results of this analysis show that the current approach to calculating prospective HCC risk scores is expected to adversely impact ACO financial performance, particularly for ACOs that serve a high-risk beneficiary population, when compared to the stated alternative approach. The factors discussed in section III.G.4.e.(2) of this proposed rule—renormalizing risk scores to the national assignable FFS population, risk-adjusted regional expenditures providing a counterbalance to how risk ratios impact the benchmark, and the phased transition from V24 to V28 by means of a blended risk model—will reduce the impact of a risk adjustment model transition. However, these factors will be insufficient to prevent adverse effects on ACO financial performance due to the larger impact from the transition to V28 relative to prior CMS-HCC model transitions. The alternative policy under which CMS would apply the same CMS-HCC risk adjustment model used in the performance year to calculate prospective HCC risk scores for all benchmark years would strengthen risk adjustment in the Shared Savings Program and consistently apply the CMS-HCC model in the Shared Savings Program context as it is applied in MA.

(4) Proposed Revisions

The adoption of the alternative approach to calculating prospective HCC risk scores for the performance year and each benchmark year of an ACO's agreement period would allow us to more accurately measure the change in severity and case mix for an ACO's assigned beneficiary population or the assignable beneficiary population. Under such an approach, there would be no potential for distortion from using different CMS-HCC risk adjustment models in calculating prospective HCC risk scores for benchmark years and the performance year that could occur under the current policy. For this reason, we propose to modify our current use of the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model and adopt the alternative approach to calculating prospective HCC risk scores for a performance year and the relevant benchmark years for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

We propose to add a new section to our regulations at § 425.659, which would codify our existing framework for calculating risk scores used in Shared Savings Program benchmark calculations and adopt the alternative approach to calculating prospective HCC risk scores for a performance year and the relevant benchmark years discussed in this section of this proposed rule. We propose in paragraph (a) of § 425.659 to codify our current practice of accounting for differences in severity and case mix of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries and assignable beneficiaries (as defined under § 425.20) in calculations used in establishing, adjusting and updating the ACO's historical benchmark.

We propose to set forth in paragraph (b) of § 425.659 our approach to determining Medicare FFS beneficiary prospective HCC risk scores for Shared Savings Program benchmark and performance year calculations. In paragraph (b)(1) of § 425.659, we propose to codify our current policy under which CMS specifies the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries (as defined under § 425.20) for use in Shared Savings Program calculations. Additionally, we propose:

• To codify our current practice of calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for a performance year, which provides that CMS uses the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology applicable for the corresponding calendar year.

• To codify our current practice for agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, of applying the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology for the calendar year corresponding to benchmark year in calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for each benchmark year of the agreement period.

• For agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, CMS would apply the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology for the calendar year corresponding to the performance year in calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for each benchmark year of the agreement period.

We propose at § 425.659(b)(2) to codify our current practices for calculating prospective HCC risk scores for a benchmark or performance year. Specifically, in calculating prospective HCC risk scores, we would remove the MA coding intensity adjustment, if applicable. Further, we would renormalize prospective HCC risk scores by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries) based on a national assignable FFS population for the relevant benchmark or performance year. We would calculate the average prospective HCC risk score by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries) in order to risk adjust benchmark calculations also performed by Medicare enrollment type.

We note that at this time we are not proposing to modify the current approach to calculating demographic risk scores under the Shared Savings Program, as described in section III.G.4.e.(1) of this proposed rule.

We also propose to adjust the benchmark to account for CMS-HCC risk adjustment model changes during the term of the agreement period to maintain uniformity between the calculation of prospective HCC risk scores for the performance year and each benchmark year. We propose to revise the list of circumstances for adjusting the historical benchmark for the second and each subsequent performance year during the term of the agreement period at § 425.652(a)(9) to include a change in the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores under proposed, new § 425.659. We further propose to add a new paragraph (a)(9)(vi) to § 425.652 to specify that we would redetermine factors based on prospective HCC risk scores calculated for benchmark years by calculating the prospective HCC risk scores using the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology that applies for the calendar year corresponding to the applicable performance year in accordance with proposed § 425.659(b)(1).

We also propose a technical and conforming change to § 425.650(a), which generally describes the organization of the sections on the benchmarking methodology within subpart G of the Shared Savings Program regulations. In the description of the benchmarking methodology applicable for agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, we propose to update the list of referenced sections to include the proposed new § 425.659.

This proposed policy would address the concerns of ACOs and other interested parties regarding the transition to the V28 CMS-HCC model or other similar future changes to CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology that could occur during the term of an ACO's agreement period. Under this proposal, both the numerator and denominator in the PY/BY3 risk ratio would be calculated using a consistent risk model, and any distributional impacts should, on average, be balanced. This would prevent distortion to historical benchmarks resulting from model changes. This conclusion is informed by the data analysis described in section III.G.4.e.(3) of this proposed rule, which shows that on average ACOs would have earned roughly 0.2 percent in additional PY 2021 shared savings payments relative to benchmark when both benchmark year and performance year prospective HCC risk scores are calculated under V28 compared to calculations under both V24 and V28.

Our analysis shows that ACOs with high risk scores would benefit from using the proposed approach to calculate BY and PY prospective HCC risk scores relative to the current policy. This proposal would therefore help the Shared Savings Program retain ACOs serving the highest risk beneficiaries. This is a priority for CMS as high risk beneficiaries may benefit the most from better care coordination and quality improvement activities, particularly by ACOs with above average duration of participation in the program. Similarly, the proposed approach would support potential participation from new ACOs that would consider whether risk adjustment calculations in the Shared Savings Program benchmarking methodology would be adequate for beneficiaries with the highest risk.

This proposal would not affect how prospective HCC risk scores are calculated for ACOs in agreement periods that began prior to January 1, 2024, consistent with our historical practice of incorporating changes to the benchmarking methodology only at the start of an ACO's agreement period. ACOs in an existing agreement period that includes performance year 2024, 2025 or 2026 may benefit from the factors discussed in section III.G.4.e.(2) of this proposed rule—renormalizing risk scores to the national assignable FFS population, risk-adjusted regional expenditures providing a counterbalance to how risk ratios impact the benchmark, and the phased transition from V24 to V28 by means of a blended risk model. These factors would diminish adverse effects of using the new CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology in Shared Savings Program calculations.

If we finalize the proposed approach for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, we note that an ACO in an existing agreement period may choose to terminate its participation agreement early in order to early renew under a new participation agreement to be under the revised approach. For instance, an ACO under an existing agreement period with the current methodology (with a 2022 or 2023 start date) could apply to early renew with the application cycle for the January 1, 2025 agreement period start date, which would occur during CY 2024. For an existing ACO that applied to early renew and enters a new agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, the proposed policy, if finalized, would apply to the ACO's new agreement period. Any ACO that early renews would have its benchmark rebased at the start of the new agreement period.

The following examples, based on the first three years of a 5-year agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, illustrate the applicability of the current approach to calculating BY and PY prospective HCC risk scores using different CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s), as compared to the proposed approach to calculating both BY and PY prospective HCC risk scores using the same CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s). Under the current policy an ACO beginning a new agreement period on January 1, 2024, would have its prospective HCC risk scores for BY1 (2021) calculated using a blend of 25 percent under the 2014 CMS-HCC model, Version 22 (V22), and 75 percent V24, 204 and for BY2 (2022) and BY3 (2023) calculated using V24. 205 206 For PY1 (2024), prospective HCC risk scores would be calculated using a blend of 67 percent V24 and 33 percent V28. For PY2 (2025), prospective HCC risk scores are expected to be calculated using a blend of 33 percent V24 and 67 percent V28. For PY3 (2026), prospective HCC risk scores are expected to be calculated using V28. Under the current methodology, the risk ratios used to risk adjust expenditures would have the numerator and denominator calculated using different underlying CMS-HCC risk adjustment models. Specifically, to risk adjust BY1 expenditures to BY3 when establishing or adjusting the ACO's historical benchmark, the risk ratio would include risk scores calculated under V24 (BY3) and a blend of 25 percent V22 and 75 percent V24 (BY1). To risk adjust BY3 expenditures to the performance year when updating the historical benchmark during financial reconciliation, risk ratios would include risk scores calculated under V24 (as applicable to BY3) and either a blend of V24 and V28 (for PY1 and as expected for PY2) or fully calculated with V28 (as expected for PY3).

204 For more details, refer to Announcement of Calendar Year (CY) 2021 Medicare Advantage (MA) Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment Policies (April 6, 2020), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2021-announcement.pdf .

205 For more details, refer to Announcement of Calendar Year (CY) 2022 Medicare Advantage (MA) Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment Policies (January 15, 2021), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2022-announcement.pdf . 206 For more details, refer to Announcement of Calendar Year (CY) 2023 Medicare Advantage (MA) Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment Policies (April 4, 2022), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2023-announcement.pdf .

Under the proposed approach, BY and PY prospective HCC risk scores would be calculated under the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) applicable to the calendar year corresponding to the relevant performance year. For an ACO beginning a new agreement period on January 1, 2024, in PY1 (2024) all benchmark year and PY1 prospective HCC risk scores would be calculated using a blend of 67 percent V24 and 33 percent V28. In PY2 (2025), all benchmark year and PY2 prospective HCC risk scores are expected to be calculated using a blend of 33 percent V24 and 67 percent V28. In PY3 (2026), all benchmark year and performance year prospective HCC risk scores are expected to be calculated using V28. In the case of an ACO in an existing agreement period that early renews for a new agreement period beginning on January 1, 2025, the calculations described in this paragraph regarding the blend of V24 and V28 for 2025 and the fully phased-in V28 CMS-HCC model for 2026 would be expected to apply for the ACO's first and second performance years (respectively).

We seek comment on these proposals regarding the prospective HCC risk scores to be used in risk adjustment for purposes of benchmark calculations under the Shared Savings Program.

5. Proposed Modifications to Advance Investment Payments Policies

a. Overview

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69782 through 69805), we finalized a new payment option for eligible Shared Savings Program ACOs entering agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024, to receive advance shared savings payments. This payment option is referred to as advance investment payments (AIP) and the payments themselves are referred to as advance investment payments.

In that final rule, we explained that section 1899(i) of the Act authorizes the Secretary to use other payment models instead of the one-sided model described in section 1899(d) of the Act so long as the Secretary determines that the other payment model would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries without additional program expenditures (87 FR 69783 and 69784). In accordance with section 1899(i) of the Act, we determined that making advance investment payments to certain ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries by enhancing the accessibility of the Shared Savings Program ( Id. ).

We established standards for an ACO's receipt and use of advance investment payments within the Shared Savings Program regulations at § 425.630 and also specified requirements in connection with AIP in other sections within 42 CFR part 425. Such standards include: eligibility criteria to limit AIP to new, low revenue ACOs that are inexperienced with performance-based risk; application procedures and contents, including submission of a spend plan; policies governing use and management of payments; amount and frequency of advance investment payments, which are comprised of a one-time $250,000 upfront payment and up to 8 quarterly payments; the methodology for calculation of the quarterly payment amount based on the ACO's assigned population; termination of advance investment payments, as well as recoupment and recovery of advance investment payments; policies to monitor ACO eligibility for AIP; and ACO public reporting requirements regarding the use of advance investment payments.

Within this section of this proposed rule, we propose modifications to refine AIP policies to better prepare for initial implementation of AIP beginning with ACOs entering agreement periods on January 1, 2024. In summary, we are proposing to better support ACOs that are prepared to progress to performance-based risk by allowing ACOs to advance to two-sided model Levels within the BASIC track's glide path beginning in PY3 of the agreement period in which they receive advance investment payments (section III.G.5.b of this proposed rule). We are also proposing to recoup advance investment payments from shared savings for ACOs that wish to early renew to continue their participation in the Shared Savings Program (section III.G.5.c of this proposed rule). We propose to specify that CMS would terminate advance investment payments for future quarters to ACOs that elect to terminate their participation in the Shared Savings Program (section III.G.5.d. of this proposed rule). We propose to require ACOs to report spend plan updates and actual spend information to CMS in addition to publicly reporting such information (section III.G.5.e. of this proposed rule). We propose to codify that ACOs receiving advance investment payments may seek reconsideration review of all payment calculations (section III.G.5.f. of this proposed rule). If finalized, these policies would be effective beginning January 1, 2024.

b. Proposal To Modify AIP Eligibility Requirements To Allow ACOs To Advance to Performance-Based Risk During the 5-Year Agreement Period

(1) Background

The policies we finalized with the CY 2023 PFS final rule require an ACO to remain under a one-sided model for the duration of its agreement period in which it receives advance investment payments to remain compliant with AIP requirements. The ACO would otherwise face potential compliance action and may be required to repay all advance investment payments within 90 days of receiving written notification from CMS. This limits an ACO's ability to select participation options that include progression along the BASIC track's glide path to a performance-based two-sided risk model. This policy arises from the interaction of numerous standards.

First, an ACO is eligible to receive advance investment payments if CMS determines that all of the following criteria are met: (1) the ACO is not a renewing or a re-entering ACO; (2) the ACO has applied to participate in the Shared Savings Program under any level of the BASIC track's glide path and is eligible to participate in the Shared Savings Program; (3) the ACO is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives; and (4) the ACO is a low revenue ACO (§ 425.630(b)). An eligible ACO will receive a one-time upfront payment of $250,000 and quarterly payments each quarter for the first 2 performance years of the ACO's 5-year agreement period, totaling no more than 8 quarterly payments (§ 425.630(f)).

Second, under § 425.630(h), CMS will terminate an ACO's advance investment payments in accordance with § 425.316(e) if the ACO is no longer inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or is no longer a low revenue ACO. Section 425.316(e) specifies that if CMS determines during any performance year of the agreement period that an ACO receiving advance investment payments is experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or is a high revenue ACO, and the ACO remains experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or a high revenue ACO after a deadline specified by CMS pursuant to compliance action, the ACO must repay all advance investment payments it received.

An eligible ACO that joins the Shared Savings Program in Level A of the BASIC track and opts to receive advance investment payments will be eligible for all 8 quarterly payments to be paid over PY1 and PY2, so long as the ACO remains in Level A (or progresses to Level B) in PY2 and remains inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and a low revenue ACO. An ACO that joins the Shared Savings Program at Levels B through E of the BASIC track, however, will not be eligible to receive all 8 quarters of advance investment payments because current program regulations require that an ACO remain inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives while receiving advance investment payments (§ 425.630(h)(2)). More specifically, if an ACO receiving advance investment payments elects to participate at Level B of the BASIC track in PY1 progresses along the glide path to Level C for PY2, CMS would determine that the ACO is experienced with performance-based risk in PY2 and the ACO would no longer be eligible to receive advance investment payments during PY2.

In the CY 2023 final rule (87 FR 69787), we stated that advance investment payments were intended to assist smaller, community-based providers in forming high-performing ACO networks by providing much-needed startup capital that can be used to attract and maintain staffing, purchase healthcare delivery infrastructure and IT systems, and develop and implement a strategy to address the health needs of underserved communities. It is for this reason we restricted AIP eligibility to those ACOs that are inexperienced with performance-based risk. ACOs that are experienced with performance-based risk generally would not need advance investment payments to successfully participate in the Shared Savings Program as they have previously participated in the Shared Savings Program or certain Innovation Center models or CMS programs in which the ACO accepted risk for shared losses. In this proposed rule, we propose to modify program regulations to permit an ACO to progress to two-sided risk along the BASIC track's glide path within the agreement period while the ACO continues to benefit from advance investment payments.

(2) Proposed Revisions

We propose to modify AIP eligibility requirements to allow an ACO receiving advance investment payments to transition to two-sided risk within its 5-year agreement period under the BASIC track's glide path. Specifically, we propose to modify § 425.630(b)(2) and (3) to allow an eligible ACO receiving advance investment payments to advance to performance-based risk (by advancing from Level A or B to Level C, D, or E of the BASIC track's glide path) beginning in PY3 of the ACO's agreement period. We also propose to modify § 425.316(e)(2) to specify that CMS would cease payment of advance investment payments if CMS determines that an ACO approved for AIP became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives during the first or second performance year of its agreement period or became a high revenue ACO during any performance year of the agreement period in which it received advance investment payments. Pursuant to § 425.316(e)(2)(ii), CMS may take compliance action against such ACOs. We also propose to modify § 425.316(e)(2)(i) to specify that CMS will cease payment of advance investment payments no later than the quarter after the ACO became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or became a high revenue ACO.

Under the proposed approach, ACOs may choose to move into a two-sided risk participation option within the Shared Savings Program's BASIC track beginning in PY3 (and in subsequent performance years). These ACOs would still be required to repay advance investment payments through earned shared savings over the remaining performance years of its agreement period as prescribed in § 425.630(g). We propose that this policy would be effective January 1, 2024. Under this proposal, an ACO could not use advance investment payments to fund repayment mechanisms or repay shared losses. This limitation also reduces the risk that ACOs stretch themselves beyond their financial capacity while receiving advance investment payments by taking on large amounts of risk. Unlike other ACOs, ACOs receiving advance investment payments will have the additional financial obligation of repaying the advance investment payments if they misjudge their appetite for risk and leave the program mid performance period after incurring shared losses. These policies are intended to align with our goal to support the creation of new ACOs that need time and resource assistance to develop the infrastructure to operate an ACO that effectively manages patient care and lowers costs.

After 2 years of participation, new ACOs may have sufficient experience to be capable of taking on the smaller amounts of downside risk available in levels C-E of the BASIC track. Given that the option to receive advance investment payments was designed for ACOs that are new to the Shared Savings Program, low revenue, and inexperienced with risk, it does not align with broader program goals to permit ACOs of such size or capitalization to take on the high levels of downside risk in the ENHANCED track during their first agreement period in the Shared Savings Program. As proposed, these modifications balance the risk of a new ACO taking on too much risk too quickly while allowing them to take on moderate risk as they develop more experience with the program.

Specifically, we propose to amend the eligibility criteria specified in § 425.630(b) as follows. We propose to revise the eligibility criterion at § 425.630(b)(2) to remove language stating that the ACO has applied to participate in the Shared Savings Program “under any level of the BASIC track's glide path”; the revised provision would simply state that “CMS has determined that the ACO is eligible to participate in the Shared Savings Program.” Further, we propose to amend the criterion in § 425.630(b)(3) to specify that the ACO must be inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives during its first 2 performance years but may participate in Levels of the BASIC track that would make them experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives starting with the third year of its first agreement period. Specifically, we propose to specify in revisions to § 425.630(b)(3), that the ACO may participate in the Levels of the BASIC track's glide path as follows during the agreement period in which the ACO receives advance investment payments:

• For performance year 1, the ACO must participate in Level A of the BASIC track's glide path.

• For performance year 2, the ACO may participate in Level A of the BASIC track's glide path (in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 )) or Level B.

• For performance years 3 through 5, the ACO may participate in Level A of the BASIC track's glide path (in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 )), or Levels B through E.

To illustrate the proposed policy, consider an ACO entering an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, that applies for and is determined to be eligible to receive advance investment payments. The ACO must participate in Level A for PY1. In PY2, the ACO may remain under Level A for all subsequent years of the agreement period in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 ) or may move to Level B. The ACO would receive advance investment payments for PY1 and PY2, receiving the one-time payment of $250,000 and the 8 quarterly payments. If the ACO remained at Level A for PY2, it could then transition to a higher level of risk and potential reward within the glide path for PY3 (that is, Levels B, C, D, or E) in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 )( iii ). If the ACO participated in Level B for PY2, it could automatically progress for PY3 to Level C (in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)(2)) or elect to transition to Level D (in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)(2)(i) and § 425.226(a)(2)(i)) or Level E (in accordance with § 425.600(h)(2)(i) and § 425.226(a)(2)(i)) beginning with PY3.

Under this proposed modification, CMS would continue to recoup from future shared savings. In contrast to what is required under existing § 425.316(e)(3), the ACO would not be immediately obligated to repay all advance investment payments it received by virtue of its transition to a two-sided model in its third performance year or any subsequent performance year. We note that under our proposal if an ACO opts to progress to a two-sided risk model (BASIC track's glide path Levels C through Level E) in PY2, CMS would terminate the ACO's advance investment payments, the ACO may be subject to compliance actions specified in §§ 425.216 and 425.218, and CMS may seek repayment of advance investment payments as set forth at § 425.316(e).

We seek comment on our proposals to amend AIP policies and require that all AIP ACOs be inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives while the ACO receives advance investment payments—that is, during PY1 and PY2 of the agreement period—and to allow ACOs to progress to performance-based risk under the BASIC track's glide path beginning with PY3 of the same agreement period.

c. Proposal To Modify AIP Recoupment and Recovery Policies for Early Renewing ACOs

(1) Background

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69803 through 69805), CMS finalized program policies regarding recoupment and recovery of advance investment payments. In accordance with § 425.630(g)(4), if an ACO terminates its participation agreement during the agreement period in which it received an advance investment payment, the ACO must repay all advance investment payments it received. CMS will provide written notification to the ACO of the amount due and the ACO must pay such amount no later than 90 days after the receipt of such notification.

Paragraph (2) of the definition of “renewing ACO” at § 425.20 includes an ACO that continues its participation in the Shared Savings Program for a consecutive agreement period, without a break in participation, because it is an ACO that terminated its current participation agreement under § 425.220 and immediately enters a new agreement period to continue its participation in the program. In prior rulemaking (see, for example, 83 FR 67885 through 67890), we have referred to this provision as allowing for an “early renewal” option. In developing the AIP policies in the PFS rulemaking for CY 2023, we did not address the potential interactions between the policy on recovery of advance investment payments specified in § 425.630(g) and a voluntary termination of the participation agreement by an ACO that is seeking to early renew.

(2) Proposed Revisions

We propose to amend § 425.630(g)(4) to create a limited exception to CMS's policy of recovering advance investment payments from an ACO that voluntarily terminates its participation agreement for the agreement period during which it received advance investment payments. Under this proposal, we would not seek to collect all advance investment payments received from an ACO in accordance with § 425.630(g)(4) if the ACO voluntarily terminates its participation agreement at the end of PY2 or later during the agreement period in which it received advance investment payments, provided that the ACO immediately enters into a new participation agreement with CMS under any level of the BASIC track's glide path or the ENHANCED track. Rather, we would carry forward any remaining balance of advance investment payments owed by the early renewing ACO into the ACO's new agreement period.

We propose to allow an ACO approved for AIP to early renew its participation agreement before the expiration of its current agreement, as long as the ACO terminates its current participation agreement effective on or after December 31 of the ACO's second performance year. By requiring the ACO to maintain its current agreement period for the first 2 years, the ACO will receive all of its advance investment payments prior to renewing its participation agreement. We further propose that in such circumstances, the early renewing ACO must continue to repay the advance investment payments through shared savings earned in the subsequent agreement period. If an ACO early renews prior to PY3, it will no longer comply with the eligibility requirements for receiving payments in § 425.630(b)(1) and may be subject to compliance actions under §§ 425.216 and 425.218.

Section 425.630(e)(3) specifies that an ACO may spend an advance investment payment over its entire agreement period and must repay to CMS any unspent funds remaining at the end of the ACO's agreement period. We propose to amend § 425.630(e)(3) to permit an early renewing ACO to spend advance investment payments in its second agreement period so long as the advance investment payments are spent within 5 performance years of when it began to receive advance investment payments. If the ACO does not spend all of the advance investment payments received by the end of the fifth performance year, the ACO must repay any unspent funds to CMS. The duration of spending advance investment payments was discussed in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69801).

We believe these policy proposals would be most relevant to an ACO that is receiving advance investment payments and seeks to early renew to enter a new participation agreement to participate under modified Shared Savings Program policies that are not applicable to the ACO's current agreement period. For such an ACO, any remaining balance of advance investment payments owed would continue to be recouped from any shared savings the ACO earns in its new agreement period. Further, such an ACO would continue its participation in the Shared Savings Program without a lapse in participation and would be required to continue to adhere to all AIP requirements. We believe continued program participation aligns with our goals to improve the quality and efficiency of care. These policies provide ACOs the flexibility to participate in the Shared Savings Program in a manner that may work best for their structure and patient population without having to choose between immediately paying back the advance investment payment funds they received and being able to enter a new agreement with the Shared Savings Program. Some policy changes are applicable to new agreement periods, and we believe ACOs approved for AIP should have the opportunity to enter a new agreement to experience those changes. This proposed modification, if finalized, would be effective January 1, 2024.

We seek comment on the proposed changes to § 425.630(e)(3) and § 425.630(g)(4).

d. Proposal To Amend Termination Policies To Allow CMS To Cease Distribution of Advance Investment Payments Following an ACO's Notification of Voluntary Termination

(1) Background

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69803), we finalized policies for termination of advance investment payments at § 425.630(h). Section 425.630(h)(1) specifies that CMS may terminate an ACO's advance investment payments if the ACO fails to comply with the requirements of § 425.630 or meets any of the grounds for ACO termination set forth in § 425.218(b). However, we did not address the termination of advance investment payments if an ACO voluntarily terminates its participation agreement in accordance with § 425.220(a). This created ambiguity regarding whether CMS would continue to make quarterly advance investment payments to an ACO that voluntarily terminates its participation agreement in accordance with § 425.220(a) and does not immediately enter a new agreement period. We are concerned that the continued payment of advance investment payments in such a case would not serve the purpose for which CMS is making such payments and would create unnecessary program integrity risks for the Shared Savings Program. In such a case, CMS would be knowingly paying funds to an ACO that will need to be repaid upon termination.

(2) Proposed Revisions

We propose to permit CMS to terminate advance investment payments for future quarters to an ACO that has provided CMS with notice of termination in accordance with § 425.220(a) if the ACO will not immediately enter a new agreement period. This avoids distributing advance investment payments to an ACO from which CMS would subsequently need to recover such payments. Specifically, we propose to add § 425.630(h)(1)(iii), which allows CMS to terminate an ACO's advance investment payments when the ACO voluntarily terminates its participation agreement in accordance with § 425.220(a). We are also proposing conforming changes to the punctuation of the list of factors in paragraphs (h)(1)(i) and (ii) of § 425.630. If finalized, these proposed changes would be effective January 1, 2024.

In summary, if finalized, CMS will cease paying advance investment payments to an ACO that voluntarily terminates its participation in the Shared Savings Program if the ACO will not immediately enter a new agreement period. In accordance with § 425.630(g)(4), the ACO would still be obligated to repay all advance investment payments within the 90-days after receiving notice of the amount due to CMS. We seek comment on this proposal.

e. Proposal To Require ACOs To Report to CMS Spend Plan Updates and Use of Advance Investment Payments

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69786 through 69788), CMS finalized program policies to require ACOs that receive advance investment payments to submit a spend plan to CMS as a part of their Shared Savings Program application (§ 425.630(d)(1)). In accordance with § 425.630(d)(3), CMS may review an ACO's spend plan at any time and require the ACO to modify its spend plan to comply with the spend plan requirements specified at § 425.630(d)(2) and the requirements for use and management of advance investment payments at § 425.630(e).

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69801 and 69802), we also finalized requirements at § 425.308(b)(8) that an ACO receiving advance investment payments must publicly report information, updated annually, about the ACO's use of advance investment payments for each performance year, including the following:

• The ACO's spend plan.

• The total amount of any advance investment payments received from CMS.

• An itemization of how advance investment payments were spent during the year, including expenditure categories, the dollar amounts spent on the various categories, any changes to the spend plan submitted under § 425.630(d), and such other information as may be specified by CMS.

These provisions do not require an ACO to submit this same information to CMS. To support CMS's ability to monitor AIP efficiently, we propose that an ACO must report to CMS the same information about its use of advance investment payments that it is required to publicly report under § 425.308(b)(8).

To ensure that § 425.630 sets forth the complete requirements applicable to an ACO's obligation to report information on its receipt and use of advance investment payments, we propose to add a new provision at § 425.630(i) specifying that an ACO must (1) publicly report information about the ACO's use of advance investment payments for each performance year in accordance with § 425.308(b)(8); and (2) in a form and manner and by a deadline specified by CMS, report to CMS the same information it is required to publicly report in accordance with § 425.308(b)(8).

We believe that these proposed changes would help ensure that CMS efficiently obtains information in a consistent manner from all ACOs receiving advance investment payments and thereby support CMS's monitoring and analysis of the use of advance investment payments. CMS believes that these proposed changes will impose little to no administrative burden on participating ACOs, which are already required to publicly report this information by § 425.308(b)(8). Further, CMS expects to use the submitted data as the template that ACOs can use to populate their public reporting web page early in each performance year to minimize administrative burden for ACOs.

If finalized, these proposed changes would be effective January 1, 2024. We seek comment on these proposals.

f. Proposal To Permit Reconsideration Review of Quarterly Payment Calculations

(1) Background

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69795 and 69796), we specified that an ACO can request a reconsideration review if CMS does not make an advance investment payment to the ACO pursuant to subpart I of part 425 (§ 425.630(f)). However, we did not specify that an ACO could request reconsideration of the advance investment payment amount received.

(2) Proposed Revisions

We propose to permit an ACO to request a reconsideration review for all advance investment payment quarterly payment calculations, not just instances where no payments are distributed. We propose to revise § 425.630(f) to provide that CMS would notify in writing each ACO of its determination of the amount of advance investment payment it will receive and that such notice would inform the ACO of its right to request reconsideration review in accordance with the procedures specified under subpart I of the regulations. We seek comment on this proposal.

6. Shared Savings Program Eligibility Requirements

a. Overview

We are proposing two modifications to the Shared Savings Program eligibility requirements that, if finalized, would be implemented on January 1, 2024. Specifically, we propose the following, which are discussed in more detail in sections (b) and (c) below:

• Remove the option for ACOs to request an exception to the shared governance requirement that 75 percent control of an ACO's governing body must be held by ACO participants.

• Codify the existing Shared Savings Program operational approach to specify that CMS determines that an ACO participant TIN participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if it was or will be included on a participant list used in financial reconciliation for a performance year under performance-based risk during the 5 most recent performance years.

b. Shared Governance Requirement

(1) Background

In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67819), we finalized policies that require an ACO to establish and maintain a governing body with adequate authority to execute the statutory functions of an ACO, and we codified the governing body policies at § 425.106. Specifically, § 425.106(c)(3) mandates that at least 75 percent control of an ACO's governing body must be held by ACO participants. An ACO's governing body is responsible for providing ACO leadership, strategic direction, and oversight for operational management towards meeting the goals of the ACO, including better care, healthy communities, and reduced spending. This responsibility incorporates not only the delivery of improved healthcare, but also the promotion of evidence-based healthcare practices, improved engagement of patients and caregivers, reporting on quality and cost, provision of high-quality care to beneficiaries, and the distribution of shared savings, among other functions. In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67819), we indicated our belief that this requirement allowed for Medicare-enrolled entities that directly provide health care services to beneficiaries to drive decision-making, while recognizing that partnerships with non-Medicare enrolled entities outside this 75 percent composition allow these participants access to capital and infrastructure needed for an ACO. This physician-driven leadership is balanced by the remaining percentage of the governing body that is made up of patient advocates, accounting, legal and other professionals that support administrative duties and other functions of the ACO.

We affirmed in the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67820) our belief that the 75 percent participant control requirement is necessary to ensure that ACOs are provider-driven, innovative in care delivery and strike an appropriate balance to incentivize and empower ACO participants to be accountable for the success of the ACO's operations and improve the health outcomes of their beneficiaries. Previously, commenters expressed concern that the 75 percent participant control threshold is overly prescriptive and may hinder operations, conflict with IRS and State tax laws, and restrict access to capital for the ACO. ACOs requested flexibility to develop their own governing body composition to meet the unique leadership needs of the ACO. In response to these comments, CMS granted an exception process for an ACO that wishes to structure its governing body in a manner that does not meet the 75 percent participant control threshold as required under § 425.106(c)(3). Under the exception process defined at § 425.106(c)(5), an ACO must describe why it seeks to differ from the 75 percent participant control threshold and how the ACO will involve ACO participants in innovative ways in ACO governance. If the exception is granted by CMS, an ACO can form a governing body with less than 75 percent participant control.

In the December 2014 Medicare Shared Savings Program proposed rule (79 FR 72776) we proposed to revise § 425.106(c)(5) to remove the flexibility for ACOs to deviate from the requirement that at least 75 percent control of an ACO's governing body must be held by ACO participants. We stated that, through program implementation, we learned that ACO applicants do not have difficulty meeting the requirements under § 425.106(c)(3) that ACO participants maintain 75 percent control of the governing body. We also noted that since CY 2012, we had not denied participation to any ACO applicants solely based on failure to comply with this requirement and no exceptions have been granted by CMS under § 425.106(c)(5). Furthermore, we affirmed the 75 percent participant control requirement to be “necessary and protective of the ACO participant's interests” and thus, that there was no reason to continue to offer an exception to the rule.

During the public comment period for the December 2014 Medicare Shared Savings Program proposed rule, several commenters advocated for retaining the flexibility offered at § 425.106(c)(5), stating that an ACO may elect to utilize the exception in the future. In our response, we noted that our program experience thus far had not suggested that commenters' concerns that laws concerning the composition of tax-exempt or State-licensed entities would interfere with their ability to meet the 75 percent participant control threshold would impact their compliance with this requirement. However, since implementation of the requirement remained in the early stages and we had limited applicability with ACOs in two-sided risk tracks, we declined to finalize the proposal in the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32719) and elected to retain the flexibility at § 425.106(c)(5). In the final rule, we noted that we anticipated granting such exceptions only in limited circumstances (that is, an ACO being unable to meet the 75 percent participant control requirement because it conflicts with other laws) and might revisit this issue in future rulemaking.

(2) Proposed Revisions

We continue to believe that ACO participants should drive ACO leadership to move toward improved quality of care and patient outcomes, and that this is a key component of ACO success and ability to earn shared savings. The 75 percent participant control threshold is critical to ensuring that governing bodies are participant-led and best positioned to meet program goals, while allowing for partnership with non-Medicare enrolled entities to provide needed capital and infrastructure for ACO formation and administration.

Over the years, a few ACOs have requested an exception to form a governing body with less than 75 percent participant control. CMS discussed the exemption requests with the interested ACOs and ultimately the ACOs made adjustments to comply with the 75 percent participant control requirement. To date, CMS has not granted an ACO an exception to this requirement, despite the flexibility provided in current regulation. Accordingly, we believe that there is no reason to continue to offer an exception to the requirement, as ACOs have demonstrated that they can appropriately meet the 75 percent participant control requirement without utilizing this flexibility since its establishment in the November 2011 final rule. Thus, we propose to remove the option under § 425.106(c)(5) for ACOs to request an exception to the requirement specified in § 425.106(c)(3) that 75 percent control of the ACO's governing body must be held by ACO participants. Additionally, we propose a corresponding revision to § 425.204(c)(3) to remove the option for ACOs to request an exception to the 75 percent control requirement under § 425.106(c)(3) as part of their Shared Savings Program applications.

We are seeking public comments on the appropriateness of our proposed policy refinement and elimination of the exception process. If finalized, our proposed modification to § 425.106(c) would make no changes to paragraphs (c)(2), (3) and (4). CMS would amend § 425.106(c)(5) to remove reference to paragraph (c)(3) and the procedure for submitting a request for an exception to the 75 percent requirement. Specifically, the revised regulation text would state: “In cases in which the composition of the ACO's governing body does not meet the requirements of paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the ACO must describe why it seeks to differ from these requirements and how the ACO will provide meaningful representation in ACO governance by Medicare beneficiaries.” Additionally, CMS would amend § 425.204(c)(3) to remove references to § 425.106(c)(3) and the procedure for submitting a request for an exception to the 75 percent requirement. Specifically, the revised regulation text would state: “If an ACO requests an exception to the governing body requirement in § 425.106(c)(2), the ACO must describe—(i) Why it seeks to differ from the requirement; and (ii) How the ACO will provide meaningful representation in ACO governance by Medicare beneficiaries.” If finalized, this policy would be effective beginning January 1, 2024.

c. Identifying ACOs Experienced With Risk Based on TINs' Prior Participation

(1) Background

In the December 2018 final rule, we added a new paragraph (d) under § 425.600 to set forth the participation options for ACOs that are experienced or inexperienced with “performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” (which is defined at § 425.20 to include certain Innovation Center ACO models as well as two-sided risk tracks of the Shared Savings Program). We also finalized the definitions of “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” and “inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” (83 FR 68062). These definitions classify ACOs by experience level based on the percentage of ACO participant TINs that participated in performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives during a 5-year lookback period. However, current regulation text does not specify how CMS determines whether an ACO participant TIN has “participated” in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative. To improve clarity of the regulations, we propose to codify our existing program policy under which an ACO participant TIN is considered to have participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if it was or will be included in financial reconciliation for a performance year under such initiative during any of the 5 most recent performance years.

Under the December 2018 final rule, an ACO is “inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” (and therefore eligible to enter an agreement period under the BASIC track's glide path), if less than 40 percent of its ACO participants has participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative in “each” of the 5 most recent performance years prior to its Shared Savings Program agreement start date, and the ACO legal entity has not participated in any performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative (83 FR 67895). Similarly, an ACO is “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” if 40 percent or more of its ACO participants has participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative in “any” of the 5 most recent performance years prior to its Shared Savings Program agreement start date (83 FR 67895). Thus, if 40 percent or more of the entities on an ACO participant list participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative in a single performance year within the 5 most recent performance years, we would determine that the ACO meets the definition of “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives.” Conversely, we would determine that an ACO satisfies the definition of “inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” only if it is below the 40 percent threshold in all of the 5 most recent performance years prior to the ACO's agreement start date. In other words, an ACO is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives as long as it does not meet the definition of “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” in any of the five most recent performance years prior to the ACO's agreement start date. We chose to use a 5-year lookback period for determining whether an ACO is experienced or inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives for a number of reasons, including that it could reduce the incentive for organizations to wait out the period in an effort to establish a new legal entity with the same or very similar composition of ACO participants for purposes of gaming program policies.

We recognize that some ACOs or TINs in performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives participate for only part of a performance year, but our current regulation text does not specify the duration of participation required for CMS to determine that an ACO participant TIN has participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative.

(2) Proposed Revisions

We propose to codify the current operational approach for determining whether an ACO participant has participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative. Under our current operational approach, an ACO participant is considered to have participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if its TIN was or will be used to calculate financial reconciliation for the entity participating in such ACO initiative (“Initiative ACO”). In general, if an ACO participant was included on an Initiative ACO's participant list for a performance year during the 5 most recent performance years before the ACO's agreement start date, and the Initiative ACO is, or will be, financially reconciled for that performance year, the ACO participant will be considered to have participated in the Initiative ACO. This will generally be true regardless of whether the entity leaves the Initiative ACO mid-performance year, because its claims experience would still be used in the Initiative ACO's alignment and financial reconciliation for that performance year. If the ACO participant was included on an Initiative ACO's participant list for a performance year during the lookback period, but the ACO voluntarily terminates before the deadline for reconciliation or is otherwise not eligible for reconciliation, the ACO participant will not be considered to have experience with risk because its claims experience would not be used for financial reconciliation.

Except for determinations made regarding AIP ACOs for purposes of § 425.316(e)(2), we determine whether an ACO is experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives prior to the start of an ACO's agreement start date. At the time we make these determinations, the ACO may be in the middle of a PY for which reconciliation has not yet occurred. Nevertheless, we believe that at the time we make these determinations, we have the information necessary to determine whether an ACO or ACO participant TIN will be included in financial reconciliation for a PY in the relevant Medicare ACO initiative because this issue is addressed in the terms of each Medicare ACO initiative. For example, as outlined in § 425.221(b)(2)(ii)(A), if an ACO in a two-sided model terminates from the Shared Savings Program after June 30th of a PY, they will be held responsible for a pro-rated share of any shared losses determined for the performance year during which the termination becomes effective. Any ACO participant TIN that was included on the participant list for that performance year will have been included in beneficiary alignment and their claims experience used to calculate the benchmark and performance year expenditures. For other Medicare ACO initiatives, the terms of the participation agreement specify when the ACO is subject to reconciliation and which TINs will be included in reconciliation.

We propose to modify the existing definitions for “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” and “inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” at § 425.20 to include the following new sentence at the end of each definition: “An ACO participant is considered to have participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if the ACO participant TIN was or will be included in financial reconciliation for a performance year under such initiative during any of the 5 most recent performance years.” We also propose a technical correction to remove the language “as defined under this section” from both definitions. We propose that these amendments would become effective on January 1, 2024.

We seek comments on the proposed regulation text.

7. Proposed Technical Changes to References in Shared Savings Program Regulations

a. References to an ACO's Assignment Methodology Selection

Section 1899(c)(2)(A) of the Act, as amended by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, provides all ACOs with a choice of prospective assignment for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2020. In the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 67859 through 67863), we finalized modifications to the Shared Savings Program's regulations, to separate the choice of beneficiary assignment methodology from the choice of participation track (financial model). We also added a new section of the Shared Savings Program regulations at § 425.226 to govern annual participation elections. In accordance with § 425.226, before the start of a performance year an ACO may make elections related to its participation in the Shared Savings Program, including selection of its beneficiary assignment methodology, which will be effective at the start of the applicable performance year and for the remaining years of the agreement period, unless superseded by a later election. Section 425.226(a)(1) specifies that an ACO may select the assignment methodology that CMS employs for assignment of beneficiaries under subpart E of the Shared Savings Program regulations. An ACO may select either of the following: (i) preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, as described in § 425.400(a)(2); or (ii) prospective assignment, as described in § 425.400(a)(3).

For consistency, in the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 67991), we also finalized conforming changes to regulations that previously identified assignment methodologies according to program track. Among other changes to the Shared Savings Program regulations, we added § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) to establish that for agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years, the ACO may select the assignment methodology CMS employs for the assignment of beneficiaries. As specified in § 425.400(a)(4)(ii)(B), this selection of assignment methodology is made prior to the start of each agreement period, and may be modified prior to the start of each performance year as specified in § 425.226 (83 FR 67863).

Although §§ 425.226(a)(1) and 425.400(a)(4)(ii) both reference assignment methodology selection, there are key differences in the purpose each section serves in directing action from the ACO versus action that CMS initiates. Section 425.226 states that the initial selection of, and any annual selection for a change in, beneficiary assignment methodology by an ACO, must be made in the form and manner, and according to the timeframe, that we establish. Therefore, § 425.226(a)(1) is the relevant regulation for referencing the ACO's option to select and to change its selection of assignment methodology. That is, § 425.226 describes actions for which the ACO is responsible because the ACO is selecting the assignment methodology that will be effective at the beginning of the ACO's agreement period or making a change to the ACO's prior assignment methodology selection that will become effective at the beginning of the next performance year.

In comparison, § 425.400 outlines how we employ the assignment methodology described in §§ 425.402 and 425.404 for purposes of benchmarking, preliminary prospective assignment (including quarterly updates), retrospective reconciliation, and prospective assignment. Therefore, § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) is the relevant regulation for referencing how we determine the assignment methodology to be used in the referenced program operations or program calculations. That is, § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) governs actions undertaken by us because we are applying the ACO's selected assignment methodology when determining benchmarking, preliminary prospective assignment, retrospective reconciliation, and prospective assignment.

Throughout the current Shared Savings Program regulations text, there are various references to § 425.226(a)(1) or § 425.400(a)(4)(ii). We conducted a review of the Shared Savings Program regulations text to determine whether the existing twelve references to either § 425.226(a)(1) or § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) align with provisions' intended purposes. We also considered the intended purposes of the provisions in identifying the appropriate cross-reference to include in the proposed new regulation at § 425.655, which is described in section III.G.4.b. of this proposed rule.

We believe the following five references to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) are consistent with the intended purpose of § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), in referring to how we determine the ACO's chosen assignment methodology for purposes of determining beneficiary assignment or performing certain program calculations: § 425.609(c)(1); § 425.652(a)(5)(v)(A); § 425.652(b)(2)(iv)(A); § 425.654(a)(1)(i); and § 425.656(b)(3).

We believe the following two references to § 425.226(a)(1) are consistent with the intended purpose of § 425.226(a)(1) because the references are used when referring to the ACO's option to change its selection of assignment methodology: § 425.601(a)(9) introductory text; and § 425.652(a)(9) introductory text.

We identified five inconsistencies in references to §§ 425.226(a)(1) and 425.400(a)(4)(ii) that we are proposing to revise in this proposed rule. To follow is a description of the five references we are proposing to revise and the proposed technical changes to the applicable provisions in 42 CFR part 425, subpart G to ensure that the appropriate assignment selection reference is being cited for clarity and consistency.

For performance years starting on January 1, 2019, and subsequent performance years, CMS adds beneficiaries to an ACO's list of assigned beneficiaries based on a beneficiary's designation of an ACO professional as the provider or supplier they consider responsible for coordinating their overall care, if certain conditions are satisfied, including the conditions specified in § 425.402(e)(2)(ii)(A). In accordance with § 425.402(e)(2)(ii)(A), the beneficiary must meet the eligibility criteria established at § 425.401(a) and must not be excluded by the criteria at § 425.401(b). Further, the provision specifies that the exclusion criteria at § 425.401(b) apply for purposes of determining beneficiary eligibility for alignment to an ACO based on the beneficiary's designation of an ACO professional as responsible for coordinating their overall care under § 425.402(e), regardless of the ACO's assignment methodology selection under § 425.400(a)(4)(ii). The reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) in § 425.402(e)(2)(ii)(A) is not consistent with the intended purpose of the reference the ACO's selected assignment methodology. Therefore, we are proposing to amend § 425.402(e)(2)(ii)(A) by removing the reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) and adding in its place a reference to § 425.226(a)(1), for clarity and consistency.

The introductory text of § 425.601(a) (applicable to agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, and before January 1, 2024) and § 425.652(a) (applicable to agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years) specifies that in computing an ACO's historical benchmark for its first agreement period under the Shared Savings Program, CMS determines the per capita Parts A and B fee-for-service expenditures for beneficiaries that would have been assigned to the ACO in any of the 3 most recent years prior to the start of the agreement period using the ACO participant TINs identified before the start of the agreement period as required under § 425.118(a) and the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the first performance year of the agreement period as required under § 425.226(a)(1). Accordingly, the introductory text of § 425.601(a) and § 425.652(a) is describing how we will compute expenditures for beneficiaries that would have been assigned to the ACO based on the assignment methodology selected by the ACO. This provision is referring to how we determine the assignment methodology to be used to identify the beneficiary population that would have been assigned in the three benchmark years, not to the ACO's act of selecting the assignment methodology. Therefore, we are proposing to amend the introductory text of § 425.601(a) and § 425.652(a) by removing the reference to § 425.226(a)(1) and adding in its place a reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) , for clarity and consistency.

Section 425.652(a)(9)(ii) specifies that for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, when adjusting the benchmark for certain changes during the agreement period, we redetermine the regional adjustment amount under § 425.656 according to the ACO's assigned beneficiaries for BY3, and based on the assignable population of beneficiaries identified for the assignment window corresponding to BY3 that is consistent with the assignment window that applies under the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.226(a)(1). In § 425.652(a)(9)(ii) the reference to § 425.226(a)(1) is not consistent with the intended purpose of the reference, which is to specify how we determine the assignment methodology that will be used to identify the assigned beneficiary and assignable beneficiary populations which are in turn used to redetermine the regional adjustment in the event the ACO changes its selected assignment methodology. Therefore, we are proposing to amend § 425.652(a)(9)(ii) by removing the reference to § 425.226(a)(1) and adding in its place the reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), for clarity and consistency.

Section 425.652(a)(9)(iv) describes that for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, when adjusting the benchmark for certain changes during the agreement period, we redetermine the proration factor used in calculating the prior savings adjustment under § 425.658(b)(3)(ii) to account for changes in the ACO's assigned beneficiary population in the benchmark years of the ACO's current agreement period due to the addition and removal of ACO participants or ACO providers/suppliers in accordance with § 425.118(b), a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection under § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), or changes to the beneficiary assignment methodology under 42 CFR part 425, subpart E. In § 425.652(a)(9)(iv) the reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), is not consistent with the intended purpose of provision, which is to specify that we will redetermine the proration factor used in calculating the prior savings adjustment if the ACO changes its beneficiary assignment methodology selection. Therefore, we are proposing to amend § 425.652(a)(9)(iv) by removing the reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) and adding in its place a reference to § 425.226(a)(1), for clarity and consistency.

We seek comments on these proposed technical changes.

b. Definition of Rural Health Clinic

In the November 2011 final rule, we established a definition for the term “Rural health center (RHC)” for the Shared Savings Program at § 425.20. 207 The definition of “Rural health center (RHC)” at § 425.20 states that this term has the same meaning given to this term under § 405.2401(b). The term “Rural health clinic (RHC)” is defined at § 405.2401(b) to mean a facility that has—

207 See, for example, 76 FR 67930 through 67932 (discussion of our proposal to define FQHCs and RHCs as these terms are defined in § 405.2401(b)), and 76 FR 67974 and 67975 (finalized regulations text for § 425.20).

• Been determined by the Secretary to meet the requirements of section 1861(aa)(2) of the Act and 42 CFR part 491 concerning RHC services and conditions for approval; and

• Filed an agreement with CMS that meets the requirements in § 405.2402 to provide RHC services under Medicare.

This inconsistency between § 425.20, which inaccurately uses the word “center,” and § 405.2401(b), which accurately uses the word “clinic,” recently came to our attention. We note that the term “rural health clinic” was in use and defined at § 405.2401(b) when we established the term and definition for “Rural health center (RHC)” under part 425 with the November 2011 final rule. Furthermore, in the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67803) we separately established an acronym “RHCs” for “Rural Health Clinics” in the acronyms list reflecting the accurate term.

To ensure clarity and accuracy, we are proposing to correct the error in the definition for “Rural health center (RHC)” at § 425.20 by replacing the word “center” with the word “clinic”. We would like to clarify that all uses of the acronym “RHC” or “RHCs” throughout Part 425—including in the definition of “primary care physician” in § 425.20 as well as in §§ 425.102 and 425.304 and throughout 42 CFR part 425, subpart E—have been interpreted to refer to “rural health clinic” or “rural health clinics” as defined at § 405.2401(b). Further, we propose to revise the definition of rural health center in § 425.20 to specify that the referenced provision at § 405.2401(b) is within Title 42, Chapter IV of the Code of Federal Regulations. We seek comments on these proposed technical changes.

c. Definition of At-Risk Beneficiary

In the November 2011 final rule (see 76 FR 67974), we established the definition of “At-risk beneficiary” at § 425.20, the meaning of which includes, but is not limited to, a beneficiary who—

• Has a high risk score on the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model;

• Is considered high cost due to having two or more hospitalizations or emergency room visits each year;

• Is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid;

• Has a high utilization pattern;

• Has one or more chronic conditions;

• Has had a recent diagnosis that is expected to result in increased cost;

• Is entitled to Medicaid because of disability; or

• Is diagnosed with a mental health or substance abuse disorder.

In finalizing modifications to the proposed definition of at-risk beneficiary, we explained that we agreed with commenters that our proposed definition should be expanded to include patients who are entitled to Medicare (emphasis added) because of disability (see 76 FR 67950). However, in codifying the relevant regulation text at § 425.20, we inadvertently referred to patients who are entitled to Medicaid because of disability (emphasis added). We note that an individual who is entitled to Medicare because of disability and who is also entitled to Medicaid, would be included under the category “Is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.”

We are proposing to correct the typographical error in the definition for “At-risk beneficiary” at § 425.20 by replacing the word “Medicaid” in paragraph (7) with the word “Medicare”. We also propose to adjust inaccurate punctuation in the list of paragraphs within this definition by replacing the period at the end of paragraphs (5) and (6) with a semi-colon. We seek comment on these proposed changes.

d. Updating Terminology in Regulations on Data Sharing With ACOs

It has come to our attention that certain terminology that is used in the data sharing regulations for the Shared Savings Program in 42 CFR part 425, subpart H is outdated or inconsistent with the terminology used elsewhere in the Medicare program and in the HIPAA regulations in 45 CFR part 164. We are proposing technical and conforming changes to § 425.702(c)(1)(ii)(A)( 3 ) and § 425.702(c)(1)(ii) for clarity and consistency.

In accordance with the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA), CMS discontinued the use of Social Security Number-based Health Insurance Claim Numbers (HICNs) as the beneficiary identifier on Medicare cards and replaced that identifier type with Medicare Beneficiary Identifiers (MBIs) by April 2019. MBIs are now used for Medicare transactions like billing, eligibility status, and claim status. All claims with a date of service on or after January 1, 2020, must use the beneficiary's MBI, rather than the HICN. 208 209 To accommodate this change from HICN to MBI, starting in PY 2018 we revised Shared Savings Program reports providing beneficiary-identifiable information under § 425.702, and claim and claim line feed files with beneficiary identifiable claims data provided under § 425.704, to include a field for the beneficiary's MBI. By the end of PY 2019 we discontinued populating data in the HICN fields. However, when we made this operational update we did not make conforming changes to the regulations text at § 425.702(c)(1)(ii)(A) to revise the list of the four data elements we provide to ACOs on their fee-for-service beneficiary population: (1) beneficiary name; (2) date of birth; (3) HICN; and (4) sex. Therefore, because CMS has discontinued use of the HICN, we propose to revise § 425.702(c)(1)(ii)(A)( 3 ) to refer to “Beneficiary identifier” instead of “Health Insurance Claim Number (HICN).” This change to the regulations text will not change the information that is provided to ACOs pursuant to § 425.702(c)(1)(ii).

208 CMS, MLN Matters, “New Medicare Beneficiary Identifier (MBI) Get It, Use It”. Article number SE18006, revised March 19, 2020. Available at https://www.cms.gov/outreach-and-education/medicare-learning-network-mln/mlnmattersarticles/downloads/se18006.pdf. 209 CMS.gov website, Medicare Beneficiary Identifiers (MBIs), at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/New-Medicare-Card.

Further, we propose to revise the list of purposes in § 425.702(c)(1)(ii) for which an ACO may request certain beneficiary-identifiable data for purposes of population-based activities to better align with the terminology used in the first paragraph of the definition of health care operations at 45 CFR 164.501. Specifically, we propose to remove the reference to “process development” and to add in its place a reference to “protocol development.” In prior rulemaking, we indicated that ACOs could request beneficiary-identifiable data under § 425.702(c)(1)(ii) for purposes of carrying out population-based activities, including process development, and referred to care coordination processes and required process development under § 425.112 (see 80 FR 32734 and 32735). We do not believe the revision we are proposing would impact ACOs' ability to request data for these types of process development. Rather, activities related to care coordination processes and the development of required processes under § 425.112 would continue to fall within the population-based activities listed in § 425.702(c)(1)(ii) for which an ACO may request data, including protocol development (as added by this proposed revision) and care coordination. This proposed revision would also ensure that the terminology used in § 425.702(c)(1)(ii) is consistent with the language of the proposed new provision at § 425.702(c)(1)(iii) discussed in section III.G.2.b.(2) of this proposed rule.

We seek comment on these proposed changes.

8. Seeking Comments on Potential Future Developments to Shared Savings Program Policies

a. Background

In an article published on the New England Journal of Medicine's website on April 27, 2022, 210 CMS lays out a vision for how Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) participating in the Shared Savings Program and in Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (Innovation Center) models can help CMS achieve its goal of having all beneficiaries in the traditional Medicare program cared for by health care providers who are accountable for costs and quality of care by 2030. This article describes a vision for the Shared Savings Program and new Innovation Center models to expand participation in ACOs, strengthen incentives for savings for participants and for Medicare, and make access to ACOs more equitable, including: (1) aligning features of new Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (Innovation Center) models and features in the Shared Savings Program; (2) adopting lessons from the ACO Investment Model to help provide upfront investments for small ACOs that lack experience with performance-based risk; (3) examining benchmarking approaches that could support increased participation, including among organizations serving patients with high costs of care and address the effects of rebasing and regional benchmark adjustments; and (4) examining the use of incentives to recruit health care providers that care for underserved populations to join ACOs, with the goal of closing gaps in outcomes, and asking health care providers to consider beneficiaries' social needs in care plans.

210 Jacobs D, Rawal P, Fowler L, Seshamani M. Expanding Accountable Care's Reach among Medicare Beneficiaries. NEJM.org, April 27, 2022, available at https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp2202991.

CMS adopted several policies as part of the CY 2023 PFS final rule to advance these goals, including providing advance shared savings payments in the form of advance investment payments to certain new, low-revenue ACOs that they can use to build the infrastructure needed to succeed in the Shared Savings Program and promote equity by holistically addressing beneficiary needs, including social needs; reinstating a sliding scale reflecting an ACO's quality performance for use in determining shared savings for ACOs and shared losses for ENHANCED track ACOs; modifying the benchmarking methodology to strengthen financial incentives for long-term participation by reducing the impact of ACOs' performance and market penetration on their benchmarks; support the business case for ACOs serving high-risk and a high proportion of dually eligible populations to participate; and mitigate bias in regional expenditure calculations for ACOs electing prospective assignment; and expanding opportunities for certain low-revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track to share in savings.

CMS has also continued to receive significant input from interested parties regarding opportunities to increase participation in ACO initiatives. One such option would be to identify ways that the Shared Savings Program can support ACOs' efforts to strengthen primary care, such as by providing prospective payments for primary care that would reduce reliance on fee-for-service payments and support innovations in care delivery that better meet beneficiary needs and increase access to primary care in underserved communities. Empirical data support the notion that primary care serves as the foundation of high-performing ACOs. ACO performance results have indicated that ACOs comprised of 75 percent or more of primary care clinicians share in savings at almost twice the rate of those ACOs comprised of less than 75 percent primary care clinicians. 211 Another option would be to offer a higher risk track in the Shared Savings Program, on which CMS requests input below.

211 Refer to “Medicare Shared Savings Program Saves Medicare More Than $1.6 Billion in 2021 and Continues to Deliver High-quality Care”—As of August 30, 2022, available at https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/medicare-shared-savings-program-saves-medicare-more-16-billion-2021-and-continues-deliver-high.

b. Incorporating a Higher Risk Track Than the ENHANCED Track

Over time, CMS has considered a higher risk Shared Savings Program track under which the shared savings/loss rate would be somewhere between 80 percent and 100 percent (that is, a rate higher than that currently offered under the ENHANCED track) that builds on the experience of the Next Generation ACO (NGACO) and ACO Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (ACO REACH) Models. “Higher risk” sharing provides a higher level of potential reward which may encourage ACOs that would not otherwise have participated in the Shared Savings Program because of current limitations on potential upside to consider participating. Also, a higher risk sharing model may incentivize participating ACOs to take on more risk (and potential reward) and incentivize ACOs to improve performance in the program, which may result in reduced healthcare costs for Medicare, and more effective, efficient care for beneficiaries. In addition, higher risk sharing may incentivize ACOs to develop new care delivery strategies, such as a focus on specialty care integration and reduced care fragmentation. Offering a higher risk sharing track may also help CMS reach our goal of having all beneficiaries in the traditional Medicare program in a care relationship with a health care provider who is accountable for the costs and quality of their care by 2030 by encouraging efficient ACOs to continue participation in the Shared Savings Program.

Currently, under the Shared Savings Program, ACOs may enter participation agreements under one of two tracks—the BASIC track or the ENHANCED track. The BASIC track allows eligible ACOs to begin under a one-sided model and incrementally transition to higher levels of risk and potential reward through the BASIC track's glide path. The ENHANCED track is a two-sided model that represents the highest level of risk and potential reward currently offered under the Shared Savings Program. The rules governing the participation options available to ACOs and the progression from lower to higher risk for ACOs entering the program are described in § 425.600 of the regulations.

Under the BASIC track, eligible ACOs operate under either a one-sided model or a two-sided model, either sharing savings only or sharing both savings and losses with the Medicare program. Under the BASIC track's glide path, the level of risk and potential reward phases in over the course of an agreement period with the ACO beginning participation under a one-sided model and progressing to incrementally higher levels of risk and potential reward, unless the ACO chooses to begin under a two-sided model and/or progress more quickly than the glide path would require. 212 The glide path includes five levels (Levels A through E). Levels A and B are one-sided models (shared savings only); 213 and Levels C, D, and E are two-sided models (shared savings and shared losses) that provide for incrementally higher performance-based risk. 214 An ACO in the ENHANCED track operates under a two-sided model, sharing both savings and losses with the Medicare program, for all 5 performance years of the agreement period.

212 Refer to § 425.600(a)(4)(i).

213 Refer to §§ 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A)(1), 425.605(d)(1)(i) (Level A); §§ 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A)(2), 425.605(d)(1)(ii) (Level B).

214 Refer to §§ 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A)(3), 425.605(d)(1)(iii) (Level C); §§ 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A)(4), 425.605(d)(1)(iv) (Level D); §§ 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A)(5), 425.605(d)(1)(v) (Level E).

To qualify for a shared savings payment, an ACO must meet a minimum savings rate (MSR) requirement, meet the quality performance standard or alternative quality performance standard established under § 425.512, and otherwise maintain its eligibility to participate in the Shared Savings Program under 42 CFR part 425. 215 For ACOs meeting the applicable quality performance standard established under § 425.512(a)(2) or § 425.512(a)(4)(i) (for PY 2022 and PY 2023) or § 425.512(a)(5)(i) (for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years), the final shared savings rate is equal to the maximum sharing rate specific to the ACO's track/level of participation as follows: 40 percent for ACOs participating in Level A or Level B of the BASIC track, 216 50 percent for ACOs participating in Levels C, D, or E of the BASIC track, 217 and 75 percent for ACOs participating in the ENHANCED track. 218 Beginning in PY 2023, ACOs meeting the MSR requirement that do not meet the applicable quality performance standard established under § 425.512(a)(2) or § 425.512(a)(4)(i) or § 425.512(a)(5)(i), as applicable, but meet the alternative quality performance standard described in § 425.512(a)(4)(ii) (for PY 2023) or § 425.512(a)(5)(ii) (for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years) will have the opportunity to share in savings at a lower rate that is scaled by the ACO's quality performance. Additionally, beginning in PY 2024, certain ACOs participating in the BASIC track that do not meet the MSR have the opportunity to share in savings at a rate that is equal to half of the rate to which they would have otherwise been entitled had they met the MSR. 219 CMS computes an ACO's shared savings payment by applying the final sharing rate to the ACO's savings on a first dollar basis (meaning the final sharing rate is applied to the ACO's full total savings amount), with the payment subject to a cap that is equal to 10 percent of the updated benchmark for an ACO in the BASIC track or 20 percent of the updated benchmark for an ACO in the ENHANCED track. 220

215 Refer to §§ 425.100(b), 425.604(c), 425.605(c), 425.606(c), 425.610(c).

216 Refer to § 425.605(d)(1)(i)(A), (d)(1)(ii)(A).

217 Refer to § 425.605(d)(1)(iii)(A), (d)(1)(iv)(A), (d)(1)(v)(A).

218 Refer to § 425.610(d).

219 Refer to § 425.605(h).

220 Refer to § 425.605(d); § 425.610(e).

ACOs that operate under a two-sided model and have losses that meet or exceed a minimum loss rate (MLR) must share losses with the Medicare program. 221 Once this MLR is met or exceeded, the ACO will share in losses at a rate determined according to the ACO's track/level of participation, up to a loss recoupment limit (also referred to as the loss sharing limit). 222 In determining shared losses, ACOs participating in Level C, D, or E of the BASIC track are subject to a fixed shared loss rate (also referred to as the loss sharing rate) of 30 percent. 223 ENHANCED track ACOs are subject to a loss rate that is scaled by the ACO's quality performance, subject to a minimum of 40 percent and a maximum of 75 percent. 224

221 Refer to § 425.100(c).

222 Refer to § 425.605(d); § 425.610(f), (g).

223 Refer to § 425.605(d)(1)(iii)(C), (d)(1)(iv)(C), (d)(1)(v)(C).

224 Refer to § 425.610(f).

For agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, certain ACOs were only allowed to enter the program in the ENHANCED track, and ACOs entering the program in the BASIC track were limited in how many agreement periods they could participate in the BASIC track before being required to transition to the ENHANCED track. Based on changes finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, for agreement periods starting on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, participation in the ENHANCED track will be optional (see 87 FR 69818).

In the NGACO Model, NGACOs were offered the choice between two risk arrangements, partial risk or full risk. Under both arrangements, the NGACO was responsible for 100 percent of performance year expenditures, for services rendered to the NGACO's aligned beneficiaries. 225 Under the partial risk arrangement, the NGACO could receive or owe up to 80 percent of savings/losses, whereas under the full risk arrangement, the NGACO could receive or owe up to 100 percent of savings/losses. To mitigate the ACO's risk of large shared losses, as well as to protect the Medicare Trust Funds against paying out excessive shared savings, NGACOs were required to choose a cap on gross savings/losses. The cap, expressed as a percentage of the benchmark, ranged from 5 percent to 15 percent. The risk arrangement chosen by the NGACO (80 or 100 percent) was applied to gross savings or losses after the application of the cap. In PYs 1-3, a discount was applied to the NGACO's benchmark that was set at a standard 3 percent, with various adjustments, that allowed the final discount to vary from 0.5 percent to 4.5 percent. In PYs 4-6, a discount of 0.5 percent was applied to the benchmark under the partial risk arrangement, and a discount of 1.25 was applied to the benchmark under the full risk arrangement. The purpose of the discount was to ensure that CMS received a financial benefit from any savings achieved by the NGACOs participating in the model.

225 In 2020, due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, NGACOs were offered an optional amendment to the Participation Agreement (PA) for 2020 (PY5). For NGACOs that signed the amendment, CMS removed all beneficiary experience associated with COVID-19 related admissions and retrospectively updated the prospective trend with a regional observed trend. For 2021, CMS modified the NGACO financial methodology to provide financial protection to all NGACOs continuing in the model for PY6. PY6 financial protections included: adoption of an extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy, under which any shared losses were prorated based on the number of months during the PHE and the number of beneficiaries residing in an impacted area, and all expenses associated with COVID-19 related admissions were removed from both PY expenditures and retrospective trend.

Under the ACO REACH Model, REACH ACOs are offered the choice of participating under the Global or the Professional Risk Options. As in the NGACO Model, under both risk sharing options, the ACO REACH ACO is responsible for 100 percent of performance year expenditures for services rendered to aligned beneficiaries. Because ACOs electing the Global Risk Option retain up to 100 percent of the savings/losses, a discount is applied to the benchmark to ensure savings are also generated for CMS. Consequently, for ACOs in the Global Risk Option, the benchmark is reduced by a fixed percentage based on the performance year. 226 The benchmark for ACOs participating in the Professional Option does not include this discount, and these ACOs are only eligible to retain 50 percent of savings or owe 50 percent of any losses.

226 For more details, refer to CMS, ACO Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (REACH) Model, PY2023 Financial Settlement Overview, available at: https://innovation.cms.gov/media/document/aco-reach-py2023-fncl-settlement (see Table 4: Schedule of Discounts by Risk Arrangement).

When considering including a higher risk track in the Shared Savings Program, we must balance several factors to protect beneficiaries, ACOs, and the Medicare trust funds. One factor to consider is that there may be selective participation with regard to which ACOs would choose to participate in a higher risk track, if offered. For example, Shared Savings Program ACOs that have a history of high levels of shared savings or have received a favorable high regional adjustment to their benchmark may be more likely than other ACOs to switch to the higher risk track upon renewing or early renewing their participation in the program so they can receive additional benefit from the higher levels of potential reward offered in a higher risk track. Section 1899(i)(3) of the Act, grants the Secretary the authority to use other payment models, if the Secretary determines that doing so would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under Medicare and the alternative methodology would result in program expenditures equal to or lower than those that would result under the statutory payment model under section 1899(d). We have concerns that introducing a higher risk track would lead to only select ACOs participating, creating benefits limited almost entirely to those ACOs and limited to no benefits gained for beneficiaries or CMS.

Another consideration is that ACOs in a higher risk track could have an increased incentive (relative to existing Shared Savings Program risk models) to avoid high-cost beneficiaries in the performance year in order to maximize their potential shared savings payment or avoid or reduce potential shared losses. The Shared Savings Program truncates individual beneficiary expenditures at the 99th percentile of national Medicare fee-for-service expenditures by enrollment type, which can help to protect ACOs from the impact of expenditure outliers ( i.e., prevent a small number of extremely costly beneficiaries from significantly affecting the ACO's per capita expenditures) and reduce the incentive for ACOs to avoid high-cost beneficiaries. As described earlier in this section of this proposed rule, the Shared Savings Program also caps the amount of shared savings an ACO may receive or the amount of shared losses it may owe, which can further discourage beneficiary selection. If introducing a higher risk-track to the program, we would need to consider whether the program's existing approach to expenditure truncation and capping shared savings and shared losses would be sufficient in curbing incentives for ACOs to engage in beneficiary selection in light of the higher potential risk and reward, while ensuring that the new risk model will still be attractive to ACOs and improve the quality and efficiency of the care their assigned beneficiaries receive.

When considering a higher risk track, CMS would need to balance the incentives for ACOs to transition to higher levels of risk and potential reward only when they are very confident it is in their financial interest to do so, with the benefits of increasing ACO participation in the Shared Savings Program and in two-sided accountable care tracks, all while ensuring sufficient financial safeguards against inappropriately large shared losses for ACOs coordinating and improving quality of care for high-cost beneficiaries. We are seeking comment on the following: (1) policies/model design elements that could be implemented so that a higher risk track could be offered without increasing program expenditures; (2) ways to protect ACOs serving high-risk beneficiaries from expenditure outliers and reduce incentives for ACOs to avoid high-risk beneficiaries; and (3) the impact that higher sharing rates could have on care delivery redesign, specialty integration, and ACO investment in health care providers and practices.

c. Increasing the Amount of the Prior Savings Adjustment

Under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act, an ACO's benchmark must be reset at the start of each agreement period using the most recent available 3 years of expenditures for Parts A and B services for beneficiaries assigned to the ACO. Section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act provides the Secretary with discretion to adjust the historical benchmark by “such other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate.” Pursuant to this authority, as described in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69898 through 69915), we established a prior savings adjustment that will apply when establishing the benchmark for eligible ACOs entering an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, or in subsequent years, to account for the average per capita amount of savings generated during the ACO's prior agreement period.

The prior savings adjustment adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule is designed to adjust an ACO's benchmark to account for the average per capita amount of savings generated by the ACO across the 3 performance years prior to the start of its current agreement period for re-entering and renewing ACOs. In the final rule, we explained that reinstituting a prior savings adjustment would be broadly in line with our interest in addressing dynamics to ensure sustainability of the benchmarking methodology. Specifically, such an adjustment would help to mitigate the rebasing ratchet effect on an ACO's benchmark by returning to an ACO's benchmark an amount that reflects its success in lowering growth in expenditures while meeting the program's quality performance standard in the performance years corresponding to the benchmark years for the ACO's new agreement period. We also explained our belief that a prior savings adjustment could help address an ACO's effects on expenditures in its regional service area that result in reducing the regional adjustment added to the historical benchmark.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69899), we explained that, in order to mitigate the potential for rebased benchmarks for ACOs that are lower-spending compared with their regional service area and that achieved savings in the benchmark period to become overinflated, we believed that adjusting an ACO's benchmark based on the higher of either the prior savings adjustment or the ACO's positive regional adjustment would be appropriate. We also note that elsewhere in this proposed rule, we have proposed to further mitigate the impacts of the negative regional adjustment when the overall adjustment to an ACO's historical benchmark is negative; however, the negative regional adjustments by enrollment type would continue to be factored in when the overall regional adjustment is positive.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69902), we finalized a policy to apply a 50 percent scaling factor to the pro-rated positive average per capita prior savings because we believed it would be important to consider a measure of the sharing rate used in determining the shared savings payment the ACO earned in the applicable performance years under its prior agreement period(s). In response to discussion of this policy in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, ACOs and other interested parties commented that we should consider using a higher scaling factor that may more closely match the maximum shared savings rate from an ACO's prior agreement period. However, in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we reiterated our belief that a 50 percent scaling factor would be appropriate because it represents a middle ground between the maximum sharing rate of 75 percent under the ENHANCED track and the lower sharing rates available under the BASIC track ( e.g., 40 percent). Additionally, we noted that if we were to finalize a scaling factor that would more closely match the average shared savings rate from an ACO's prior agreement period, many ACOs would have a scaling factor below 50 percent, which would be less advantageous than the policy that we finalized.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69902), we also finalized a policy to calculate the final adjustment to the benchmark by adding the pro-rated average per capita prior savings to the ACO's negative regional adjustment for ACOs that are higher spending relative to their regional service area. Under this policy, we apply the 50 percent scaling factor after offsetting the negative regional adjustment to maximize the portion of the pro-rated average per capita savings that would be added to the negative regional adjustment in determining the final adjustment to the benchmark and strengthen incentives for ACOs to remain in the program.

MedPAC commented on the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule that while the prior savings adjustment is a reasonable policy for mitigating ratcheting effects, implementing both the prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment policies together would be duplicative. MedPAC also expressed concern that the prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment could interact in a way that would perpetuate a programmatic bias towards ACOs receiving a positive regional adjustment. In MedPAC's view, many ACOs would receive an inflated prior savings adjustment because the prior savings adjustment would be based on savings achieved using benchmarks already inflated by the regional adjustment. However, we explained in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69913) that because for most ACOs, the positive regional adjustment would exceed the prior savings adjustment, our policy of applying the larger of the regional adjustment and the prior savings adjustment potentially mitigates this concern.

We are seeking comment on potential changes to the 50 percent scaling factor used in determining the prior savings adjustment such as using an average of the ACO's shared savings rates from the 3 years prior to the start of its agreement period, increasing to 75 percent of shared savings achieved if the ACO participated in the ENHANCED track in the 3 years prior to the start of the agreement period, or another value corresponding to the maximum shared savings rate the ACO was eligible to earn in the 3 years prior to the start of the agreement period. We are also seeking comment on potential changes to the positive regional adjustment to reduce the possibility of inflating the benchmark while still mitigating potential ratchet effects on ACO benchmarks.

d. Expanding the ACPT Over Time and Addressing Overall Market-Wide Ratchet Effects

As described in the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68024 through 68030), we used our statutory authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to adopt the policy under which we update the historical benchmark using a blend of national and regional growth rates. In accordance with § 425.601(b), for agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, and before January 1, 2024, we update the historical benchmark for an ACO for each performance year using a blend of national and regional growth rates between BY3 and the performance year.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69902), we finalized a policy for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years to incorporate a prospectively projected administrative growth factor, a variant of the United States Per Capita Cost (USPCC) that we refer to as the Accountable Care Prospective Trend (ACPT), into a “three-way” blend with national and regional growth rates to update an ACO's historical benchmark for each performance year in the ACO's agreement period. The three-way blend is calculated as the weighted average of the ACPT (one-third weight) and the existing national-regional “two-way” blend (two-thirds weight). The ACPT will be projected for an ACO's entire agreement period near the start of that agreement period, providing a degree of certainty to ACOs.

We explained in the CY 2023 PFS final rule that the ACPT will insulate a portion of the annual benchmark update from any savings occurring as a result of the actions of ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program and address the impact of increasing market penetration by ACOs in a regional service area on the existing blended national-regional growth factor. Because the ACPT is prospectively set at the outset of an agreement period, any savings generated by ACOs during the agreement period would not be reflected in the ACPT component of the three-way blend. Accordingly, incorporation of the ACPT may allow benchmarks to increase beyond actual spending growth rates as ACOs slow spending growth. By limiting ACOs' ability to slow spending growth for purposes of their own benchmarks, we noted that we believed the use of this three-way blend to update ACOs' benchmarks would incentivize greater savings by ACOs and greater program participation. Additionally, because incorporating the ACPT into the update would reduce the degree to which an ACO's savings negatively impact its benchmark through the regional trend component of the update, we also stated our belief that this change to the update methodology would help to address concerns raised by ACOs and other interested parties regarding the disproportionate impact of an ACO's savings on the benchmark update for ACOs with high market share.

In the final rule, we noted that it was possible that incorporating the ACPT into a three-way blended update factor would have the potential for mixed effects. For example, it may also lower an ACO's benchmark relative to the two-way blend if external factors lead to higher program spending growth than originally projected at the start of an ACO's agreement period. Consequently, we finalized that if an ACO generates losses for a performance year that meet or exceed its MLR (for two-sided model ACOs) or negative MSR (for one-sided model ACOs) under the three-way blend, we would recalculate the ACO's updated benchmark using the two-way blend and the ACO would receive whichever benchmark update minimizes shared losses. However, the ACO would not be eligible to share in savings resulting from use of the two-way blend in updating the benchmark. We also finalized that if unforeseen circumstances such as an economic recession, pandemic, or other factors cause actual expenditure trends to significantly deviate from projections, we would retain discretion to decrease the weight applied to the ACPT in the three-way blend.

In their comments on the proposal to adopt the three-way blend in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, ACOs and other interested parties expressed concern that the three-way blend effectively increases the proportion of the benchmark update that is based upon national trends, as opposed to regional trends, noting that the blend may not adequately account for geographic variation in spending growth that is outside of an ACO's control. Over a 5-year agreement period, we recognize some ACOs may be disadvantaged or advantaged in the short term by benchmark updates that give greater weight to a national update factor. However, as we stated in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69891), we believe that the net impact of these deviations will be modest in the context of offsetting considerations. For example, the three-way blend only incorporates the ACPT at a one-third weight and maintains the current two-way blend for the majority weight of the benchmark trend calculation, allowing for a significant proportion of the benchmark update to reflect expenditure growth in an ACO's regional service area. The ACPT itself is also expected to project spending above realized spending as ACOs generate savings, thereby providing a stable, predictable component of the update factor that will be beneficial for ACOs.

Interested parties who commented on the proposal in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule to incorporate the ACPT as part of a three-way blend suggested modifications to the three-way blend to further mitigate potential ratchet effects and to better reflect regional variation in spending. These included modifications such as: (1) keeping a two-way national-regional blend and substituting the national component of the two-way blend with the ACPT (see 87 FR 69890); and (2) adjusting the weight of the ACPT in the three-way blend to reflect each ACO's market penetration, as is done with the national component of the two-way blend (see 87 FR 69893). CMS declined to implement these suggestions in the CY 2023 PFS final rule.

We seek comment on the following potential refinements to the ACPT and the three-way blended benchmark update factor as CMS works toward broad implementation of administrative benchmarks: (1) replacing the national component of the two-way blend with the ACPT; and (2) scaling the weight given to the ACPT in a two-way blend for each ACO based on the collective market share of multiple ACOs within the ACO's regional service area.

e. Promoting ACO and CBO Collaboration

Section 1899(b)(2)(G) of the Act requires an ACO to define processes to promote evidence-based medicine and patient engagement; report on quality and cost measures; and coordinate care, such as through the use of telehealth, remote patient monitoring, and other enabling technologies. In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67827), we finalized policies to require that a participating Shared Savings Program ACO provide documentation in its application describing its plans to: (1) promote evidence-based medicine; (2) promote beneficiary engagement; (3) report internally on quality and cost metrics; and (4) coordinate care. We emphasized our belief that ACOs should retain the flexibility to establish processes that are best suited to their practice and patient population. As part of these required processes, we explained that ACOs should adopt a focus on patient-centeredness, which could include such activities as: a process for evaluating the needs of the ACO's population, including consideration of diversity in its patient populations, and a plan to address the needs of this population, including how the ACO intends to partner with other interested parties in the community to improve the health of its population; a plan to engage in shared decision making with beneficiaries; and a plan to implement individualized care plans, including taking into account the community resources available to the individual beneficiary.

When establishing these required processes and patient centeredness criteria in the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67826), we stated that as we learn more about successful strategies in these areas, and as we gain more experience assessing specific critical elements for success, the Shared Savings Program eligibility requirements under section 1899(b)(2)(G) of the Act may be revised. For example, in subsequent rules we underscored the importance of health information technology development and infrastructure within care coordination. In the June 2015 final rule, we finalized two modifications to the care coordination processes required of ACOs under § 425.112(b)(4): (1) adding a new eligibility requirement under § 425.112(b)(4)(ii)(C), which required an ACO to describe in its application how it will encourage and promote the use of enabling technologies for improving care coordination for beneficiaries, and (2) adding a new provision at § 425.112(b)(4)(ii)(D), which required the applicant to describe how the ACO intends to partner with long-term and post-acute care providers to improve care coordination for the ACO's assigned beneficiaries (80 FR 32725). In the CY 2018 PFS final rule (82 FR 53222), we shifted from requiring an ACO to submit documents detailing how it would meet the requirements of § 425.112 as a narrative in its Shared Savings Program application to instead requiring it to certify at the time of application that it has defined the required processes and patient centeredness criteria consistent with the requirements specified in section § 425.112 and to furnish such documentation upon request—thereby reducing ACO burden while maintaining CMS's flexibility to obtain additional documentation when necessary (see § 425.204(c)(ii)).

Additionally, in previous rulemaking (80 FR 32722), we specified that the care coordination processes under § 425.112 could include coordination with CBOs that provide services that address social determinants of health. This coordination could include a plan to partner with interested parties of the community, a plan to engage in shared decision making with beneficiaries, and a plan to implement individualized care plans. In that rulemaking (80 FR 32722), we also confirmed our understanding that ACOs differ in their ability to adopt the appropriate health information exchange technologies, but we continued to underscore the importance of robust health information exchange tools in effective care coordination.

We are seeking comment on ways to improve and incentivize collaboration between ACOs and interested parties in the community or CBOs. As explained in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69790), where we refer to CBOs, we mean public or private not-for-profit entities that provide specific services to the community or targeted populations in the community to address the health and social needs of those populations. They may include community-action agencies, housing agencies, area agencies on aging, or other non-profits that apply for grants to perform social services. They may receive grants from other agencies in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, including Federal grants administered by the Administration for Children and Families (ACF), Administration for Community Living (ACL), or the Centers for Disease Control, or from State-funded grants to provide social services. Generally, we believe such organizations are trusted entities that know the populations they serve and their communities, want to be engaged, and may have the infrastructure or systems in place to help coordinate supportive services that address social determinants of health or serve as a trusted source to share information. 227 We recognize that ACOs wishing to address social needs may want to make investments in goods or social services that would enable their ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers to work with CBOs that have expertise in identifying and providing the types of social services that the ACO's beneficiary population requires.

227 U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response, Community-Based Organizations during COVID-19, available at https://www.phe.gov/emergency/events/COVID19/atrisk/returning-to-work/Pages/default.aspx .

It is important to note that the Shared Savings Program does not prohibit ACOs from partnering with CBOs. Currently, if a CBO is enrolled in Medicare, it may already be an ACO participant or an ACO provider/supplier. We believe CBOs could play an important role in identifying and addressing gaps in health equity. As we stated in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we hope to encourage more ACOs to partner with CBOs whether they provide items and services reimbursed by Medicare or not. We recognized that Federal and other sources of grant funding for social services may be insufficient to fully address the demand for services within a community or broader geography. As we noted in that final rule, contractual arrangements between the health care sector and CBOs providing social services have increased in recent years to meet this demand.

We are seeking comment on approaches, generally, for encouraging or incentivizing increased collaboration between ACOs and CBOs, including any policies specifically designed to encourage ACOs to partner with CBOs and address unmet health-related social needs. We are also seeking comment on potential changes CMS could make to the patient-centered care requirements in § 425.112 to strengthen partnerships between ACOs and interested parties in the community, including CBOs, to address unmet health-related social needs.

(2) Proposal for the Medicare Clinical Quality Measure for Accountable Care Organizations Participating in the Medicare Shared Savings Program

As discussed in section III.F.2.b.(2) of this proposed rule, we are proposing to establish the Medicare Clinical Quality Measure for Accountable Care Organizations Participating in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Medicare CQM) collection type in the APP measure set. The Medicare CQM collection type would be available to only ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program. ACOs in the Shared Savings Program would have the option to report the Medicare CQM under the APP on only their attributed Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries who meet the definition of a “beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQM(s)” as proposed in section III.F.2.b.(2) of this proposed rule, instead of their all payer/all patient population, beginning with the 2024 performance year. The Medicare CQM would also serve as another collection type in addition to the existing eCQM/MIPS CQM option, which is an all payer/all patient collection type under the APP.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we stated that we will monitor the impact of policies such as the sunsetting of the CMS Web Interface in the 2024 performance year and the requirement to report all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs beginning in the 2025 performance year (87 FR 69833). We also stated that we may revisit these and related issues in future rulemaking based on lessons learned as we gain more experience with ACOs reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs (87 FR 69833). As discussed in section III.F.2.b.(2) of this proposed rule, we are committed to supporting ACOs in the transition to all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and in the transition to digital quality measurement reporting. We encourage readers to review additional background on our proposal to include the Medicare CQM collection type in the APP measure set discussed at section III.F.2.b.(2) of this proposed rule.

3. ICRs Regarding the Medicare Shared Savings Program

Section 1899(e) of the Act provides that chapter 35 of title 44 U.S.C., which includes such provisions as the PRA, shall not apply to the Shared Savings Program. Accordingly, we are not setting out proposed Shared Savings Program burden estimates under this section of the preamble. Please refer to section VII.E.10. of this proposed rule for a discussion of the impacts associated with the changes to the Shared Savings Program as described in section III.G. of this proposed rule.

e. Medicare Shared Savings Program

In section III. G. of this proposed rule, we are proposing modifications to the Shared Savings Program to further advance Medicare's overall value-based care strategy of growth, alignment, and equity, and to respond to concerns raised by ACOs and other interested parties. The proposed changes to the Shared Savings Program include the following: modifications to the quality performance standard and reporting requirements under the APP that would continue to move ACOs toward digital measurement of quality and to align with QPP; modifications to the step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology to add a new third step and related changes to how we identify the assignable beneficiary population; updates to the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment to remain consistent with billing and coding guidelines; refinements to the financial benchmarking methodology for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years to (1) cap the risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area when calculating regional trends used to update the historical benchmark at the time of financial reconciliation for symmetry with the cap on ACO risk score growth, (2) apply the same CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology applicable to the calendar year corresponding to the performance year in calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for each benchmark year, (3) further mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustment on the benchmark to encourage participation by ACOs caring for medically complex, high cost beneficiaries, and (4) specify the circumstances in which CMS would recalculate the prior savings adjustment for changes in values used in benchmark calculations due to compliance action taken to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, or as a result of the issuance of a revised initial determination of financial performance for a previous performance year following a reopening of ACO shared savings and shared losses calculations; refine newly established AIP policies; make updates to other programmatic areas including the program's eligibility requirements; and make timely technical changes to the regulations for clarity and consistency.

10. Medicare Shared Savings Program

a. General Impacts

As of January 1, 2023, 10.9 million Medicare beneficiaries receive care from a health care provider in one of the 456 ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program, the largest value-based care program in the country. The Shared Savings Program proposed policies advance Medicare's overall value-based care strategy of growth, alignment, and equity, with many proposals overlapping these categories. The proposed policies in this proposed rule are incremental refinements to the broader changes finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69777 through 69968). Those changes were designed to reverse recent trends where program participation had plateaued, higher spending populations were increasingly underrepresented in the program since the change to regionally-adjusted benchmarks, and access to ACOs appeared inequitable as evidenced by data indicating underserved populations are less likely to be assigned to a Shared Savings Program ACO, and to encourage growth of ACOs in underserved communities.

The changes to the Shared Savings Program regulations finalized with the CY 2023 PFS final rule were designed to increase program participation for new ACOs through the AIP option intended to promote health equity, and provide ACOs greater choice in the pace of progression to performance-based risk; sustain program participation by reducing the effect of ACO performance on benchmark updates and benchmark rebasing; mitigate the bias in regional expenditure calculations that benefits ACOs electing prospective assignment; strengthen incentives for ACOs serving high risk and high dual populations; improve the risk adjustment methodology to better account for medically complex, high cost beneficiaries while continuing to guard against coding initiatives; increase opportunities for low revenue ACOs in the BASIC track to share in savings by allowing ACOs that do not meet the minimum savings rate (MSR) requirement to share in savings at a lower rate; encourage ACOs to transition more quickly to all-payer quality measure reporting; update the ACO beneficiary assignment methodology; and reduce administrative burden on ACOs. The proposed changes to Shared Savings Program policies in this proposed rule include modifications designed to further these goals in concert with implementation of certain changes finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, which are applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

On average, updated benchmarks would marginally increase as a result of the proposal to modify the calculation of the regional component of the blended update factor used to update the historical benchmark between benchmark year (BY) 3 and the performance year (PY) by capping an ACO's regional service area risk score growth through use of an adjustment factor to provide more equitable treatment for ACOs and for symmetry with the cap on ACO risk score growth (section III.G.4.b of this proposed rule). This change is expected to increase the regional update factor amount in certain cases where an ACO may operate in a regional service area with rapid change in the average prospective HCC risk score for the FFS assignable beneficiary population. The current methodology for calculating the regional update factor risk adjusts county-level FFS expenditures in an ACO's regional service area by Medicare enrollment type by dividing average county-level FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries in the county by the average prospective HCC risk score for both the performance year and BY3. The expenditure growth between BY3 and the performance year calculated using risk-adjusted regional expenditures could therefore be reduced by large increases in average prospective HCC risk scores in the ACO's regional service area that would only be partly offset by the increase in prospective HCC risk score growth for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population due to the cap on ACO assigned beneficiary prospective HCC risk score growth when updating the benchmark between BY3 and the performance year. The proposed adjustment, applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, would effectively strengthen the regional portion of the three-way blended update factor and help to limit losses ACOs may face when operating in regional service areas with high risk score growth and a beneficiary population that becomes more medically complex between BY3 and the performance year, increasing incentives for ACOs to form or continue participation in such areas. By utilizing a market share adjusted cap to account for ACO market share in the ACO's regional service area, the proposed adjustment would still retain a disincentive against coding intensity for ACOs that may have a high market share in their region and consequently have greater influence on regional service area risk score changes. For example, this feature of the proposal would help dissuade such ACOs from attempting to artificially increase their benchmark by selectively serving lower risk beneficiaries and increasing the intensity of diagnoses submitted for those beneficiaries.

Analyses described in the section III.G.4.b.(2) of this proposed rule, surrounding tables 33 and 34, provide the basis for estimating the impact for the proposal to cap regional service area risk score growth. Analysis of average prospective HCC risk score changes at the Hospital Referral Region (HRR) level over an extended 2007 to 2021 historical period consistently indicated that risk score changes would be highly unlikely to exceed the proposed cap in the first two years of an ACO's agreement period but would increase somewhat as the 5-year agreement period progresses. The analysis also notably showed that average prospective HCC risk score variation increased markedly in 2020 and 2021 with the COVID-19 PHE. 389 The 11 percent of ACOs simulated to be impacted by the proposed adjustment in PY 2021 (a mix of ACOs with 2-year and 3-year gaps between their respective BY3 and the simulated PY 2021) is therefore anticipated to overstate variation expected in agreement periods that start on January 1, 2024 or later.

389 Public use data on Medicare Geographic Variation—by Hospital Referral Region, used for this analysis, is available at https://data.cms.gov/summary-statistics-on-use-and-payments/medicare-geographic-comparisons/medicare-geographic-variation-by-hospital-referral-region .

Based on the simulation in the context of the longer-run HRR data, we project that starting in 2024 the proposed adjustment would impact less than 1 percent of ACOs in PY1 of an agreement period, between 5 to 7 percent of ACOs by PY3, and up to 10 to 15 percent of ACOs by PY5. The adjustment for ACOs that are simulated to be impacted is relatively small, increasing updated benchmarks by about 0.2 percent up to 0.4 percent on average by PY5, but with the potential for up to a net adjustment of about 1.5 percent in extreme scenarios. The estimated cost from additional shared savings payments resulting from these adjustments totals $370 million over 10 years as shown in Table 109.

A material, albeit uncertain impact, is also estimated for the proposals to (a) use a rolling 3-year historical period instead of contemporary performance to calculate the 40th percentile of the MIPS Quality performance category scores starting in PY 2024 and (b) the proposal to use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance scores if measure suppression is required. It is likely that MIPS Quality performance will improve at least marginally over time and therefore the historical performance could produce a target that effectively is lower than the contemporary 40th percentile stipulated at baseline. The effective reduction in the threshold when using the historical MIPS scores, combined with the `higher of' proposal when suppression is necessary, are assumed to effectively reduce the quality target by 0 to 5 percentage points (mode 1.5 percentage points), which would produce an estimated $110 million in additional shared savings payments over 10 years, as shown in the Table 110.

The impact is also estimated to be material for the proposal to mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustment on the benchmark. In the CY 2023 PFS final rule, CMS finalized changes applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, that would reduce the cap on negative regional adjustments from 5 percent to 1.5 percent and provide an offset factor to gradually decrease the negative regional adjustment amount as an ACO's proportion of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries increases or its weighted average prospective HCC risk score increases, or both. Removing the regional adjustment entirely, when the ACO's regional adjustment amount (expressed as a single per capita value) is negative, would incrementally increase benchmarks for higher spending ACOs (increasing shared savings payments) but would also improve the incentive for higher spending ACOs to join the Shared Savings Program and drive down unnecessary spending. For a high cost estimate we conservatively assume no new participation is generated in response to this change and estimate the higher benchmarks would generate about $1.8 billion in additional shared savings payments partly offset by about $1.6 billion in reduced spending in response to improved incentives. For a mean estimate we additionally assume 10 percent growth in participation from new high spending ACOs leading to about $490 million net savings over 10 years. 390 For a low cost estimate we instead assume 20 percent growth in participation from high spending ACOs leading to about $1.2 billion in net savings over 10 years. Table 111 shows these estimates over the 2024-2033 window.

390 Elimination of overall negative regional adjustments, under the proposed approach, would likely generate participation growth from ACOs that will face significant negative adjustments despite the changes from the CY 2023 PFS final rule to reduce the impact of the negative regional adjustment, but also from other prospective high spending ACOs that may have difficulty estimating the relief they will ultimately receive from the offsets applicable to agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. Eliminating overall negative regional adjustment entirely would materially improve the business case for participation from ACOs in the former category and may at least optically improve the business case for ACOs in the latter category without actually incurring cost to the program by increasing their benchmarks.

The proposal to specify the use of the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) applicable to the calendar year corresponding to the performance year to calculate a Medicare FFS beneficiary's prospective HCC risk score for the performance year, and for each benchmark year of the ACO's agreement period for agreement periods beginning January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, is anticipated to remove a potential bias that may otherwise reduce benchmarks particularly for ACOs with beneficiaries exhibiting higher average renormalized risk scores at baseline. An increase in average shared savings payments to ACOs that would have participated regardless of this proposed modification is expected to ultimately be more than offset by additional savings from increased participation from ACOs serving high risk beneficiaries that would have otherwise dropped out or avoided entering the Shared Savings Program under the current approach to calculating prospective HCC risk scores. Net savings are expected to be greater at the end of the 10 year scoring window because residual savings from added participation would grow, whereas benchmarks would not be as impacted in the later part of the scoring window because there is lower likelihood that later agreement periods would have been impacted by changes in the CMS HCC risk adjustment methodology. Table 112 shows these estimates over the 2024-2033 window.

An overall net impact is difficult to quantify for the proposed changes in section III.G.3.a of this proposed rule, to incorporate use of a new third step in the step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology and the proposed changes to identification of the assignable beneficiary population. These proposed changes are not currently estimated to have a net impact on program spending in either direction. Impacts on benchmark calculations for individual ACOs would likely be mixed and of relatively limited magnitude. The proposed changes could allow some ACOs to increase efficiency by utilizing more non-physician clinicians in delivering primary care without jeopardizing assignment. On the other hand, they could marginally increase shared savings payments for efficiencies that currently would accrue entirely to the program as spillover effects on beneficiaries unable to be assigned. The overall impact is currently anticipated to be roughly neutral. We will continue to analyze data on the potential impact of these proposed changes on existing ACOs, and will monitor effects if the proposals are finalized and implemented in future agreement periods.

The remaining proposed changes to the Shared Savings Program regulations are not estimated to have an impact on program spending at the aggregate level. These proposed changes include modifying the definition of primary care services for purposes of determining beneficiary assignment, recalculating the prior savings adjustment for changes in the amount of savings earned by an ACO in a benchmark year due to compliance action taken to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or changes in the amount of savings or losses for a benchmark year as a result of the issuance of a revised initial determination of financial performance, expanding quality reporting options to include Medicare CQMs, requiring reporting of MIPS PI performance category for all eligible clinicians participating in ACOs, and using beneficiary counts instead of person years in health equity adjustment calculations, as well as proposals to further refine AIP policies, revise program eligibility requirements, and make technical changes.

b. Compliance With Requirements of Section 1899(i)(3) of the Act

Certain policies, including both existing policies and the proposed new policies described in this proposed rule, rely upon the authority granted in section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to use other payment models that the Secretary determines will improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare program, and that do not result in program expenditures greater than those that would result under the statutory payment model. The following proposals require the use of our authority under section 1899(i) of the Act: the proposed modifications to the calculation of regional component of the three-way blended update factor to cap regional service area risk score growth for symmetry with the ACO risk score growth cap, as described in section III.G.4.b of this proposed rule and the refinements to AIP policies as described in section III.G.5. of this proposed rule. Further, certain existing policies adopted under the authority of section 1899(i)(3) of the Act that depend on use of the assigned population and assignable beneficiary populations, would be affected by the proposed addition of a new third step of the beneficiary assignment methodology and the proposed revisions to the definition of assignable beneficiary, described in section III.G.3. of this proposed rule, including the following: the amount of advance investment payments; factors used in determining shared losses for ACOs under two-sided models (including calculation of the variable MSR/MLR based on the ACO's number of assigned beneficiaries, and the applicability of the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy for mitigating shared losses for two-sided model ACOs); and calculation of the ACPT, regional and national components of the three-way blended benchmark update factor. When considered together these changes to the Shared Savings Program's payment methodology are expected to improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare program by improving the ability for ACOs to sustain effective participation in regions with changing populations and increasing the overall proportion of Medicare beneficiaries assigned to ACOs, and are not expected to result in a situation in which the payment methodology under the Shared Savings Program, including all policies adopted under the authority of section 1899(i) of the Act, results in more spending under the program than would have resulted under the statutory payment methodology in section 1899(d) of the Act.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule we estimated that the projected impact of the payment methodology that incorporates all finalized changes from that final rule would result in $4.9 billion in greater program savings compared to a hypothetical baseline payment methodology that excludes the policies that require section 1899(i)(3) of the Act authority (see 87 FR 70195 and 70196). The marginal impact of the proposed changes discussed in this proposed rule is estimated to be $330 million lower net spending over the ten year window for all new proposals combined, including the proposal to cap an ACO's regional service area risk score growth and the proposals to add a new third step to the beneficiary assignment methodology and to revise the approach to identify the assignable beneficiary population. Therefore, we believe the requirements of section 1899(i)(3)(B) of the Act would not be violated by these relatively minor changes to program spending.

We will continue to reexamine this projection in the future to ensure that the requirement under section 1899(i)(3)(B) of the Act that an alternative payment model not result in additional program expenditures continues to be satisfied. In the event that we later determine that the payment model that includes policies established under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act no longer meets this requirement, we would undertake additional notice and comment rulemaking to make adjustments to the payment model to assure continued compliance with the statutory requirements.

1. Medicare Shared Savings Program Provisions

As noted previously in this proposed rule, the proposal to cap an ACO's regional service area risk score growth is expected to increase the incentive for ACOs to participate in regions with high risk score growth, improving the incentive for ACOs to join and/or sustain participation when serving regions with increasingly medically complex beneficiaries. Similarly, the proposal to use a uniform approach to calculating both BY and PY prospective HCC risk scores using the same CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) is anticipated to increase participation (and reduce the potential for disenrollment) particularly from ACOs serving greater proportions of complex beneficiaries exhibiting high risk scores. The proposal to mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustments on benchmarks is expected to increase participation from ACOs serving up to 500,000 new assigned beneficiaries per year. The proposal to revise the definition of an assignable beneficiary is expected to allow more than 760,000 additional beneficiaries to be included in the population of assignable beneficiaries, many of whom would be eligible to be assigned to ACOs. In total these proposals are expected to increase participation in the Shared Savings Program over the 2024-2033 period by roughly 10 to 20 percent.

ACOs have been found to perform better on certain patient-experience and performance measures than physician groups participating in the MIPS. In addition, ACOs continued to have higher mean performance than their MIPS Group counterparts on all 10 of the CMS Web Interface measures for PY 2021. This includes higher performance for quality measures related to diabetes and blood pressure control; depression screening and depression remission rates; breast, colorectal and falls risk screening rates; and flu vaccination, tobacco screening and smoking cessation, and statin therapy for the treatment and prevention of cardiovascular disease.

Increased participation in the Shared Savings Program will extend ACO care coordination and quality improvement to segments of the beneficiary population that potentially have more to benefit from care management.

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

85. The authority citation for part 425 continues to read as follows:

Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1302, 1306, 1395hh, and 1395jjj.

86. Section 425.20 is amended—

a. By revising the definitions of “Assignable beneficiary” and “Assignment window”;

b. In the definition of “At-risk beneficiary” by—

i. Removing the periods at the end of paragraphs (5) and (6), and adding in their place semicolons; and

ii. Revising paragraph (7);

c. By adding the definitions of “Beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs” and “Expanded window for assignment” in alphabetical order;

d. In the definition of “Experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” by revising paragraph (2);

e. In the definition of “Inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” by revising paragraph (2);

f. In the definition of “Rural health center” by—

i. Removing the word “center” and adding in its place the word “clinic”; and

ii. Removing the phrase “under § 405.2401(b)” and adding in its place the phrase “under § 405.2401(b) of this chapter”.

The revisions and additions read as follows:

§ 425.20 Definitions.

Assignable beneficiary means a Medicare fee-for-service beneficiary who receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 12-month assignment window from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c). For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, a Medicare fee-for-service beneficiary who does not meet this requirement but who meets both of the following criteria will also be considered an assignable beneficiary—

(1) Receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 24-month expanded window for assignment from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c).

(2) Receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 12-month assignment window from a Medicare-enrolled practitioner who is one of the following:

(i) A physician assistant (as defined at § 410.74(a)(2) of this chapter).

(ii) A nurse practitioner (as defined at § 410.75(b) of this chapter).

(iii) A clinical nurse specialist (as defined at § 410.76(b) of this chapter).

Assignment window means the 12-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO, or to identify assignable beneficiaries, or both.

At-risk beneficiary * * *

(7) Is entitled to Medicare because of disability; or

Beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs means a beneficiary identified for purposes of reporting Medicare CQMs for ACOs participating in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Medicare CQMs), who is either of the following:

(1) A Medicare fee-for-service beneficiary (as defined at § 425.20) who—

(i) Meets the criteria for a beneficiary to be assigned to an ACO described at § 425.401(a); and

(ii) Had at least one claim with a date of service during the measurement period from an ACO professional who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c), or who is a physician assistant, nurse practitioner, or certified nurse specialist.

(2) A Medicare fee-for-service beneficiary who is assigned to an ACO in accordance with § 425.402(e) because the beneficiary designated an ACO professional participating in an ACO as responsible for coordinating their overall care.

Expanded window for assignment means the 24-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO, or to identify assignable beneficiaries, or both that includes the applicable 12-month assignment window and the preceding 12 months.

Experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives * * *

(2) Forty percent or more of the ACO's ACO participants participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative, or in an ACO that deferred its entry into a second Shared Savings Program agreement period under a two-sided model under § 425.200(e), in any of the 5 most recent performance years. An ACO participant is considered to have participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if the ACO participant TIN was or will be included in financial reconciliation for one or more performance years under such initiative during any of the 5 most recent performance years.

Inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives * * *

(2) Less than 40 percent of the ACO's ACO participants participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative, or in an ACO that deferred its entry into a second Shared Savings Program agreement period under a two-sided model under § 425.200(e), in each of the 5 most recent performance years. An ACO participant is considered to have participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if the ACO participant TIN was or will be included in financial reconciliation for one or more performance years under such initiative during any of the 5 most recent performance years.

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

87. Section 425.106 is amended by revising paragraph (c)(5) to read as follows:

§ 425.106 Shared governance.

(c) * * *

(5) In cases in which the composition of the ACO's governing body does not meet the requirements of paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the ACO must describe why it seeks to differ from these requirements and how the ACO will provide meaningful representation in ACO governance by Medicare beneficiaries.

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

88. Section 425.204 is amended by revising paragraph (c)(3) to read as follows:

§ 425.204 Content of the application.

(c) * * *

(3) If an ACO requests an exception to the governing body requirement in § 425.106(c)(2), the ACO must describe—

(i) Why it seeks to differ from the requirement; and

(ii) How the ACO will provide meaningful representation in ACO governance by Medicare beneficiaries.

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

89. Section 425.302 is amended by revising paragraph (a)(3)(iii) to read as follows:

§ 425.302 Program requirements for data submission and certifications.

(a) * * *

(3) * * *

(iii) For performance years starting on January 1, 2019 through 2023, the percentage of eligible clinicians participating in the ACO that use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers meets or exceeds the applicable percentage specified by CMS at § 425.506(f).

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

90. Section 425.308 is amended by adding paragraph (b)(9) to read as follows:

§ 425.308 Public reporting and transparency.

(b) * * *

(9) The number of MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), and Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305 of this chapter) participating in the ACO that earn a MIPS performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level as set forth in § 425.507.

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

91. Section 425.316 is amended by revising paragraphs (e)(2) introductory text and (e)(2)(i) to read as follows:

§ 425.316 Monitoring of ACOs.

(e) * * *

(2) If CMS determines that an ACO participating in advance investment payments became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives during its first or second performance year of its agreement period or that the ACO became a high revenue ACO during any performance year of its agreement period, CMS—

(i) Will cease payment of advance investment payments no later than the quarter after the ACO became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or became a high revenue ACO.

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

92. Section 425.400 is amended—

a. By revising paragraph (a)(2)(ii);

b. In paragraph (a)(3)(i), by removing the phrase “most recent 12 months” and adding in its place the phrase “most recent 12 or 24 months, as applicable,”;

c. By revising paragraph (c)(1)(vii) introductory text;

d. By adding paragraph (c)(1)(viii); and

e. By revising paragraphs (c)(2)(i) introductory text and (c)(2)(ii).

The revisions and addition read as follows:

§ 425.400 General.

(a) * * *

(2) * * *

(ii) Assignment will be updated quarterly based on the most recent 12 or 24 months of data, as applicable, under the methodology described in §§ 425.402 and 425.404.

(c) * * *

(1) * * *

(vii) For the performance year starting on January 1, 2023 as follows:

(viii) For the performance year starting on January 1, 2024, and subsequent performance years as follows:

(A) CPT codes:

( 1 ) 96160 and 96161 (codes for administration of health risk assessment).

( 2 ) 96202 and 96203 (codes for caregiver behavior management training).

( 3 ) 99201 through 99215 (codes for office or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of a patient).

( 4 ) 99304 through 99318 (codes for professional services furnished in a nursing facility; professional services or services reported on an FQHC or RHC claim identified by these codes are excluded when furnished in a SNF).

( 5 ) 99319 through 99340 (codes for patient domiciliary, rest home, or custodial care visit).

( 6 ) 99341 through 99350 (codes for evaluation and management services furnished in a patient's home).

( 7 ) 99354 and 99355 (add-on codes, for prolonged evaluation and management or psychotherapy services beyond the typical service time of the primary procedure; when the base code is also a primary care service code under this paragraph (c)(1)(viii)).

( 8 ) 99406 and 99407 (codes for smoking and tobacco-use cessation counseling services).

( 9 ) 99421, 99422, and 99423 (codes for online digital evaluation and management).

( 10 ) 99424, 99425, 99426, and 99427 (codes for principal care management services).

( 11 ) 99437, 99487, 99489, 99490 and 99491 (codes for chronic care management).

( 12 ) 99439 (code for non-complex chronic care management).

( 13 ) 99457 and 99458 (codes for remote physiologic monitoring).

( 14 ) 99483 (code for assessment of and care planning for patients with cognitive impairment).

( 15 ) 99484, 99492, 99493 and 99494 (codes for behavioral health integration services).

( 16 ) 99495 and 99496 (codes for transitional care management services).

( 17 ) 99497 and 99498 (codes for advance care planning; services identified by these codes furnished in an inpatient setting are excluded).

( 18 ) 9X015, 9X016, and 9X017 (codes for caregiver training services).

(B) HCPCS codes:

( 1 ) G0101 (code for cervical or vaginal cancer screening).

( 2 ) G0317, G0318, and G2212 (codes for prolonged office or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of a patient).

( 3 ) G0402 (code for the Welcome to Medicare visit).

( 4 ) G0438 and G0439 (codes for the annual wellness visits).

( 5 ) G0442 (code for alcohol misuse screening service).

( 6 ) G0443 (code for alcohol misuse counseling service).

( 7 ) G0444 (code for annual depression screening service).

( 8 ) G0463 (code for services furnished in ETA hospitals).

( 9 ) G0506 (code for chronic care management).

( 10 ) G2010 (code for the remote evaluation of patient video/images).

( 11 ) G2012 and G2252 (codes for virtual check-in).

( 12 ) G2058 (code for non-complex chronic care management).

( 13 ) G2064 and G2065 (codes for principal care management services).

( 14 ) G2086, G2087, and G2088 (codes for office-based opioid use disorder services).

( 15 ) G2211 (code for complex evaluation and management services add-on).

( 16 ) G2214 (code for psychiatric collaborative care model).

( 17 ) G3002 and G3003 (codes for chronic pain management).

( 18 ) GXXX1 and GXXX2 (codes for community health integration services).

( 19 ) GXXX3 and GXXX4 (codes for principal illness navigation services).

( 20 ) GXXX5 (code for social determinants of health risk assessment services).

(C) Primary care service codes include any CPT code identified by CMS that directly replaces a CPT code specified in paragraph (c)(1)(viii)(A) of this section or a HCPCS code specified in paragraph (c)(1)(viii)(B) of this section, when the assignment window (as defined in § 425.20) for a benchmark or performance year includes any day on or after the effective date of the replacement code for payment purposes under FFS Medicare.

(2) * * *

(i) Except as otherwise specified in paragraph (c)(2)(i)(A)( 2 ) of this section, when the assignment window or applicable expanded window for assignment (as defined in § 425.20) for a benchmark or performance year includes any month(s) during the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency defined in § 400.200 of this chapter, in determining beneficiary assignment, we use the primary care service codes identified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, and additional primary care service codes as follows:

(ii) Except as otherwise specified in paragraph (c)(2)(i)(A)( 2 ) of this section, the additional primary care service codes specified in paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section are applicable to all months of the assignment window or applicable expanded window for assignment (as defined in § 425.20), when the assignment window or applicable expanded window for assignment includes any month(s) during the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency defined in § 400.200 of this chapter.

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

93. Section 425.402 is amended—

a. By revising paragraph (b)(1);

b. By adding paragraph (b)(5);

c. By revising paragraph (c) introductory text; and

d. In paragraph (e)(2)(ii)(A), by removing the reference “§ 425.400(a)(4)(ii)” and adding in its place the reference “§ 425.226(a)(1)”.

The revisions and addition read as follows:

§ 425.402 Basic assignment methodology.

(b) * * *

(1) Identify all beneficiaries that had at least one primary care service during the applicable assignment window with a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO and who is a primary care physician as defined under § 425.20 or who has one of the primary specialty designations included in paragraph (c) of this section.

(5) For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, CMS employs the following third step to assign Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries who were not identified by the criterion specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section:

(i) Identify all beneficiaries who had at least one primary care service with a non-physician ACO professional in the ACO during the applicable assignment window.

(ii) For the beneficiaries identified in paragraph (b)(5)(i) of this section, identify those beneficiaries that had at least one primary care service with a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO and who is a primary care physician as defined under § 425.20 or who has one of the primary specialty designations included in paragraph (c) of this section during the applicable expanded window for assignment.

(iii) Identify all primary care services furnished to beneficiaries identified in paragraph (b)(5)(ii) of this section by ACO professionals in the ACO who are primary care physicians as defined under § 425.20, non-physician ACO professionals, and physicians with specialty designations included in paragraph (c) of this section during the applicable expanded window for assignment.

(iv) A beneficiary identified in paragraph (b)(5)(ii) of this section is assigned to the ACO if the allowed charges for primary care services furnished to the beneficiary by ACO professionals in the ACO who are primary care physicians, physicians with specialty designations included in paragraph (c) of this section, or non-physician ACO professionals during the applicable expanded window for assignment are greater than the allowed charges for primary care services furnished by primary care physicians, physicians with specialty designations as specified in paragraph (c) of this section, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and clinical nurse specialists who are—

(A) ACO professionals in any other ACO; or

(B) Not affiliated with any ACO and identified by a Medicare-enrolled billing TIN.

(c) ACO professionals considered in the second and third step of the assignment methodology in paragraphs (b)(4) and (5) of this section include physicians who have one of the following primary specialty designations:

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

94. Section 425.506 is amended by revising paragraph (f) introductory text to read as follows:

§ 425.506 Incorporating reporting requirements related to adoption of certified electronic health record technology.

(f) For performance years starting on January 1, 2019 through 2023, ACOs in a track that—

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

95. Section 425.507 is added to subpart F to read as follows:

§ 425.507 Incorporating promoting interoperability requirements related to the Quality Payment Program for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024.

(a) For performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, unless otherwise excluded under paragraph (b) of this section, all MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), and Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305 of this chapter) participating in the ACO must satisfy all of the following:

(1) Report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category measures and requirements to MIPS according to 42 CFR part 414 subpart O as either of the following—

(i) All MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs participating in the ACO as an individual, group, or virtual group; or

(ii) The ACO as an APM entity.

(2) Earn a performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level.

(b) A MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity may be excluded from the requirements set forth in paragraph (a) of this section if the MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity—

(1) Does not exceed the low volume threshold set forth at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii) of this chapter;

(2) Is an eligible clinician as defined at § 414.1305 of this chapter who is not a MIPS eligible clinician and has opted to voluntarily report measures and activities for MIPS as set forth in § 414.1310(b)(2) of this chapter; or

(3) Has not earned a performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category because the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category has been reweighted in accordance with applicable policies set forth at § 414.1380(c)(2) of this chapter.

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

96. Section 425.512 is amended—

a. By revising paragraph (a)(2);

b. In paragraph (a)(5)(i) introductory text, by removing the phrase “paragraph (a)(2) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(7) of this section”;

c. By revising paragraph (a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ), (a)(5)(iii)(A) and (B);

d. By adding paragraph (a)(7);

e. In paragraph (b)(1)—

i. By adding a new first sentence;

ii. By removing the reference “paragraph (b)(2)” and adding in its place the reference “paragraph (b)(3)”;

f. By redesignating paragraphs (b)(2) and (3) as paragraphs (b)(3) and (4), respectively;

g. By adding new paragraph (b)(2);

h. By revising the newly redesignated paragraph (b)(3)(ii)(B);

i. In newly redesignated paragraph (b)(3)(iii), by removing the phrase “paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section”;

j. By revising newly redesignated paragraph (b)(3)(iv)(A);

k. In newly redesignated paragraph (b)(3)(iv)(B), by removing the phrase “paragraph (b)(2)(iv)(A) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (b)(3)(iv)(A) of this section”;

l. In newly redesignated paragraph (b)(3)(v)—

i. By removing the phrase “paragraph (b)(2)(iv)(B) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (b)(3)(iv)(B) of this section”;

ii. By removing the phrase “paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (b)(3)(iii) of this section”;

iii. By removing the phrase “paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (b)(3)(iv) of this section”;

m. In newly redesignated paragraph (b)(4) introductory text, by removing the phrase “paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(3) of this section”; and

n. By revising paragraph (c)(3).

The revisions and additions read as follows:

§ 425.512 Determining the ACO quality performance standard for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2021.

(a) * * *

(2) For the first performance year of an ACO's first agreement period under the Shared Savings Program, the ACO will meet the quality performance standard if it meets the requirements under this paragraph (a)(2).

(i) For performance years 2022 and 2023. If the ACO reports data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter and the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 of this subchapter on the ten CMS Web Interface measures or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and the CAHPS for MIPS survey, for the applicable performance year.

(ii) For performance year 2024. If the ACO reports data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter on the ten CMS Web Interface measures or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, and the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter), and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, for the applicable performance year.

(iii) For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years. If the ACO reports data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter on the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, and the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter), and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, for the applicable performance year.

(5) * * *

(i) * * *

(A) * * *

( 2 ) If the ACO reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and achieving a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining five measures in the APP measure set.

(iii) * * *

(A) For performance year 2024, the ACO does not report any of the ten CMS Web Interface measures, any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this chapter) under the APP.

(B) For performance year 2025 and subsequent years, the ACO does not report any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this chapter) under the APP.

(7) For performance years 2024 and subsequent performance years, if an ACO reports all of the required measures, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this chapter for each measure in the APP measure set and receiving a MIPS quality performance category score as described at § 414.1380(b)(1) of this chapter, and the ACO's total available measure achievement points used to calculate the ACO's MIPS quality performance category score is reduced under § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A) of this chapter, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year.

(b) * * *

(1) For performance year 2023. * * *

(2) For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. For an ACO that reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this chapter for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, and administers the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this chapter), CMS calculates the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score as the sum of the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score for all measures in the APP measure set and the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points calculated in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section. The sum of these values may not exceed 100 percent.

(3) * * *

(ii) * * *

(B) Values of zero for each measure that CMS does not evaluate because the measure is unscored or the ACO does not meet the case minimum or the minimum sample size for the measure.

(iv) * * *

(A) ( 1 ) CMS determines the proportion ranging from zero to one of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for the performance year that is considered underserved based on the highest of either of the following:

( i ) The proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an Area Deprivation Index (ADI) national percentile rank of at least 85. An ACO's assigned beneficiaries without an available numeric ADI national percentile rank are excluded from the calculation of the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85.

( ii ) The proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries who are enrolled in the Medicare Part D low-income subsidy (LIS); or are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

( 2 ) CMS calculates the proportions specified in paragraph (b)(3)(iv)(A)( 1 )( ii ) of this section as follows:

( i ) For performance year 2023, the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries who are enrolled in the Medicare Part D LIS or are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid divided by the total number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries' person years.

( ii ) For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries with any months enrolled in LIS or dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid divided by the total number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries.

(c) * * *

(3) If CMS determines the ACO meets the requirements of paragraph (c)(1) of this section and the ACO reports quality data via the APP, CMS calculates the ACO's quality score as follows:

(i) For performance years 2021 and 2022, if the ACO reports quality data via the APP and meets data completeness and case minimum requirements, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's quality performance score or the equivalent of the 30th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year.

(ii) For performance year 2023, if the ACO reports quality data via the APP and meets data completeness and case minimum requirements, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 30th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year.

(iii) For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, if the ACO reports quality data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this chapter and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this chapter, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year.

§ 425.600 [Amended]

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

97. Amend § 425.600 in paragraph (f)(4)(ii) by removing the reference “425.656(d)” and adding in its place the reference “425.656(e)”.

§ 425.601 [Amended]

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

98. Amend § 425.601 in paragraph (a) introductory text by removing the reference “§ 425.226(a)(1)” and adding in its place the reference “§ 425.400(a)(4)(ii)”.

§ 425.611 [Amended]

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

99. Amend § 425.611 in paragraph (c)(2)(iii) by removing the reference “§ 425.652(a)(8)(iv)” and adding in its place the reference “§ 425.658(c)(1)(ii)”.

100. Section 425.630 is amended—

a. By revising paragraphs (b)(2) and (3), (e)(3), (f) introductory text, and (g)(4);

b. In paragraph (h)(1)(i), by removing “or” at the end of the paragraph;

c. In paragraph (h)(1)(ii), by removing “.” at the end of the paragraph, and adding in its place “; or”; and

d. By adding paragraphs (h)(1)(iii) and (i).

The revisions and additions read as follows:

§ 425.630 Option to receive advance investment payments.

(b) * * *

(2) CMS has determined that the ACO is eligible to participate in the Shared Savings Program.

(3) The ACO is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives during its first two performance years and participates in the BASIC track's glide path as follows:

(i) For performance year 1, the ACO must participate in Level A of the BASIC track's glide path.

(ii) For performance year 2, the ACO may participate in Level A of the BASIC track's glide path (in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 )) or Level B.

(iii) For performance years 3 through 5, the ACO may participate in Level A of the BASIC track's glide path (in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 )), or Levels B through E.

(e) * * *

(3) Duration for spending payments. An ACO may spend an advance investment payment over its entire agreement period. An ACO must repay to CMS any unspent funds remaining at the end of the ACO's agreement period, except if the ACO terminated its current participation agreement under § 425.220 beginning with the third or fourth performance year and immediately enters a new agreement period to continue its participation in the Shared Savings Program, the ACO must spend its advance investment payments within 5 performance years of when it first received advance investment payments and repay to CMS any unspent funds remaining at the end of that fifth performance year.

(f) Payment methodology. An ACO receives two types of advance investment payments: a one-time payment of $250,000 and quarterly payments calculated pursuant to the methodology defined in paragraph (f)(2) of this section. CMS notifies in writing each ACO of its determination of the amount of advance investment payment and the notice will inform the ACO of its right to request reconsideration review in accordance with the procedures specified in subpart I of this part. If CMS does not make any advance investment payment, the notice will specify the reason(s) why and inform the ACO of its right to request reconsideration review in accordance with the procedures specified in subpart I of this part.

(g) * * *

(4) If an ACO terminates its participation agreement during the agreement period in which it received an advance investment payment, the ACO must repay all advance investment payments it received, unless the ACO terminated its current participation agreement under § 425.220 at the end of performance year 2 or later during the agreement period in which it received advance investment payments and immediately enters a new agreement period to continue its participation in the program. CMS will provide written notification to the ACO of the amount due and the ACO must pay such amount no later than 90 days after the receipt of such notification.

(h) * * *

(1) * * *

(iii) Voluntarily terminates its participation agreement in accordance with § 425.220(a).

(i) Reporting information on advance investment payments. The ACO must report information on its receipt of and use of advance investment payments, as follows:

(1) The ACO must publicly report information about the ACO's use of advance investment payments for each performance year, in accordance with § 425.308(b)(8).

(2) In a form and manner and by a deadline specified by CMS, the ACO must report to CMS the same information it is required to publicly report under § 425.308(b)(8).

§ 425.650 [Amended]

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

101. Amend § 425.650 in paragraph (a) by removing the references “§§ 425.601, 425.602, and 425.603” and adding in their place the references “§§ 425.601, 425.602, 425.603, and 425.659”.

102. Section 425.652 is amended—

a. In paragraph (a) introductory text, by removing the reference “§ 425.226(a)(1)” and adding in its place the reference “§ 425.400(a)(4)(ii)”;

b. By revising paragraphs (a)(5)(v)(A), (a)(8), (a)(9) introductory text, and (a)(9)(ii);

c. In paragraph (a)(9)(iv), by removing the reference “§ 425.400(a)(4)(ii)” and adding in its place the reference “§ 425.226(a)(1)”;

d. In paragraph (a)(9)(v), by removing the phrase “, or a combination of these two adjustments”;

e. By adding paragraphs (a)(9)(vi) and (b)(2)(ii)(C); and

f. By revising paragraph (b)(2)(iv)(A).

The revisions and additions read as follows:

§ 425.652 Establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

(a) * * *

(5) * * *

(v) * * *

(A) Calculating the county-level share of assignable beneficiaries that are assigned to the ACO for each county in the ACO's regional service area. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for BY3 using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

(8) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(8)(iii) of this section, adjusts the historical benchmark based on the ACO's regional service area expenditures (as specified under § 425.656), or for savings generated by the ACO, if any, in the 3 most recent years prior to the start of the agreement period (as specified under § 425.658). CMS does all of the following to determine the adjustment, if any, applied to the historical benchmark:

(i) Computes the regional adjustment in accordance with § 425.656 and the prior savings adjustment in accordance with § 425.658.

(ii) If an ACO is not eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment under § 425.658(b)(3)(i), and the regional adjustment, expressed as a single per capita value as described in § 425.656(d), is positive, the ACO will receive an adjustment to its benchmark equal to the positive regional adjustment amount. The adjustment will be calculated as described in § 425.656(c) and applied separately to the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iii) If an ACO is not eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment under § 425.658(b)(3)(i), and the regional adjustment, expressed as a single per capita value as described in § 425.656(d), is negative or zero, the ACO will not receive an adjustment to its benchmark.

(iv) If an ACO is eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value as described in § 425.656(d), is positive, the ACO will receive an adjustment to its benchmark equal to the higher of the following:

(A) The positive regional adjustment amount. The adjustment will be calculated as described in § 425.656(c) and applied separately to the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(B) A prior savings adjustment. The adjustment will be calculated as described in § 425.658(c) and applied as a flat dollar amount to the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(v) If an ACO is eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value as described in § 425.656(d), is negative or zero, the ACO will receive an adjustment to its benchmark equal to the prior savings adjustment. The adjustment will be calculated as described in § 425.658(c) and applied as a flat dollar amount to the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(9) For the first performance year during the term of the agreement period, the ACO's benchmark is adjusted for the following, as applicable: For changes in values used in benchmark calculations in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315. For the second and each subsequent performance year during the term of the agreement period, the ACO's benchmark is adjusted for the following, as applicable: For the addition and removal of ACO participants or ACO providers/suppliers in accordance with § 425.118(b), for a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection under § 425.226(a)(1), for a change to the beneficiary assignment methodology specified in subpart E of this part, for a change in the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores under § 425.659, and for changes in values used in benchmark calculations in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315. To adjust the benchmark, CMS does the following:

(ii) Redetermines the regional adjustment amount under § 425.656 according to the ACO's assigned beneficiaries for BY3, and based on the assignable population of beneficiaries identified for BY3 using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

(vi) Redetermines factors based on prospective HCC risk scores calculated for benchmark years by calculating the prospective HCC risk scores using the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology that applies for the calendar year corresponding to the applicable performance year in accordance with § 425.659(b)(1).

(b) * * *

(2) * * *

(ii) * * *

(C) Multiply the growth rate calculated in this paragraph (b)(2)(ii) by a regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor computed as described in § 425.655.

(iv) * * *

(A) Calculating the county-level share of assignable beneficiaries that are assigned to the ACO for each county in the ACO's regional service area. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for the performance year using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

103. Section 425.654 is amended by revising paragraph (a)(1)(i) to read as follows:

§ 425.654 Calculating county expenditures and regional expenditures.

(a) * * *

(1) * * *

(i) Determines average county fee-for-service expenditures based on expenditures for the assignable population of beneficiaries in each county in the ACO's regional service area. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for the relevant benchmark or performance year using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

104. Section 425.655 is added to subpart G to read as follows:

§ 425.655 Calculating the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor.

(a) General. This section describes the methodology for calculating the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor that will be applied to the regional growth rate component of the three-way blend used to update the historical benchmark as described in § 425.652(b) for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

(b) Calculating county risk scores. CMS does all of the following to determine county prospective HCC and demographic risk scores for use in calculating the ACO's regional risk scores:

(1) Determines average county prospective HCC and demographic risk scores for the assignable population of beneficiaries in each county in the ACO's regional service area. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for the relevant benchmark or performance year using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

(2) Makes separate risk score calculations for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(i) ESRD.

(ii) Disabled.

(iii) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iv) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(c) Calculating regional risk scores. CMS calculates an ACO's regional prospective HCC and demographic risk scores by:

(1) Weighting the county-level risk scores determined under paragraph (b) of this section according to the ACO's proportion of assigned beneficiaries in the county, determined by the number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries in the applicable population (according to Medicare enrollment type) residing in the county in relation to the ACO's total number of assigned beneficiaries in the applicable population (according to Medicare enrollment type) for the relevant benchmark or performance year for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(i) ESRD.

(ii) Disabled.

(iii) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iv) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(2) Aggregating the values determined under paragraph (c)(1) of this section for each population of beneficiaries (according to Medicare enrollment type) across all counties within the ACO's regional service area.

(d) Determining aggregate growth in regional risk scores. CMS determines aggregate growth in regional prospective HCC and demographic risk scores by:

(1) Determining growth in regional prospective HCC and demographic risk scores determined in paragraph (c) of this section (expressed as a ratio of the performance year regional risk score to the BY3 regional risk score) for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(i) ESRD.

(ii) Disabled.

(iii) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iv) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(2) Determines the aggregate growth in regional risk scores by calculating a weighted average of the growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores or demographic risk scores, as applicable, across the populations described in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. When calculating the weighted average growth in prospective HCC risk scores or demographic risk scores, as applicable, the weight applied to the growth in risk scores for each Medicare enrollment type is equal to the product of the ACO's regionally adjusted historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type and the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary person years for that enrollment type.

(e) Determining the cap on regional risk score growth. CMS determines the cap on regional prospective HCC risk score growth by:

(1) Computing the sum of the aggregate growth in regional demographic risk scores as determined in paragraph (d)(2) of this section and 3 percentage points.

(2) Calculating the ACO's aggregate market share by calculating the weighted average of the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO for the performance year as determined in § 425.652(b)(2)(iv) across the populations described in § 425.652(b)(1). In calculating this weighted average, the weight applied to the share for each Medicare enrollment type is equal to the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary person years for that enrollment type.

(3) Adding to the sum computed in paragraph (e)(1) of this section an amount equal to the product of:

(i) The ACO's aggregate market share as determined in paragraph (e)(2) of this section.

(ii) The difference between the aggregate growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores as determined in paragraph (d)(2) of this section and the sum determined in paragraph (e)(1) of this section. This difference is subject to a floor of zero.

(f) Determining the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor. CMS determines the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor for each Medicare enrollment type to be applied in calculating the regional growth rate described in § 425.652(b) by comparing the aggregate growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores determined in paragraph (d)(2) of this section and, if applicable, the growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores for individual Medicare enrollment types as determined in paragraph (d)(1) of this section with the cap determined in paragraph (e) of this section.

(1) If the aggregate growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores determined in paragraph (d)(2) of this section does not exceed the cap on regional risk score growth determined in paragraph (e) of this section, CMS will set the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor equal to 1 for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(i) ESRD.

(ii) Disabled.

(iii) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iv) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(2) If the aggregate growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores determined in paragraph (d)(2) of this section exceeds the cap determined in paragraph (e) of this section, CMS will compare the growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores for each Medicare enrollment type as determined in paragraph (d)(1) of this section with the cap on regional risk score growth determined in paragraph (e) of this section.

(i) If the growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores for the enrollment type determined in paragraph (d)(1) of this section does not exceed the cap on regional risk score growth determined in paragraph (e) of this section, CMS will set the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor equal for that enrollment type equal to 1.

(ii) If the growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores determined in paragraph (d)(1) for the enrollment type exceeds the cap on regional risk score growth determined in paragraph (e) of this section, CMS will set the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor for that enrollment type equal to the growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores for the enrollment type determined in paragraph (d)(1) of this section divided by the cap on regional risk score growth determined in paragraph (e) of this section.

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

105. Section 425.656 is amended—

a. By revising paragraph (b)(3);

b. In paragraph (c)(2), by removing the phrase “paragraph (d) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (e) of this section”;

c. By redesignating paragraphs (d) and (e) as paragraphs (e) and (f), respectively;

d. By adding new paragraph (d);

e. In newly redesignated paragraph (e)(5)(ii), by removing the phrase “paragraph (d)(5)(i) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (e)(5)(i) of this section”;

f. In newly redesignated paragraph (e)(5)(iv), by removing the phrase “paragraphs (d)(1) through (3)” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraphs (e)(1) through (3)”; and

g. In newly redesignated paragraph (f) introductory text, by removing the phrase “paragraphs (b) through (d)” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraphs (b) through (e)”.

The revision and addition read as follows:

§ 425.656 Calculating the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark.

(b) * * *

(3) Adjusts for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for BY3 and the assignable population of beneficiaries for the ACO's regional service area for BY3. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for BY3 using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

(d) Expression of the regional adjustment as a single value. (1) CMS expresses the regional adjustment as a single value by taking a person-year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment type-specific regional adjustment values determined in paragraph (c) of this section.

(2) CMS uses the regional adjustment expressed as a single value for purposes of determining the adjustment, if any, that will be applied to the benchmark in accordance with § 425.652(a)(8).

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

106. Section 425.658 is amended—

a. In paragraph (b)(3)(i), by removing the sentence “The ACO will receive the regional adjustment to its benchmark as described in § 425.656.”;

b. By redesignating paragraph (c) as paragraph (d);

c. By adding new paragraph (c);

d. By revising newly redesignated paragraph (d); and

e. By adding new paragraph (e).

The revision and additions read as follows:

§ 425.658 Calculating the prior savings adjustment to the historical benchmark.

(c) Calculate the per capita savings adjustment.

(1) If an ACO is eligible for the prior savings adjustment as determined in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, the prior savings adjustment will equal the lesser of the following:

(i) 50 percent of the pro-rated average per capita amount computed in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section.

(ii) 5 percent of national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare fee-for-service program in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3 using data from the CMS Office of the Actuary and expressed as a single value by taking a person-year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment type-specific values.

(2) [Reserved]

(d) Applicability of the prior savings adjustment. CMS compares the per capita prior savings adjustment determined in paragraph (c)(1) of this section with the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value as described in § 425.656(d), to determine the adjustment, if any, that will be applied to the ACO's benchmark in accordance with § 425.652(a)(8).

(e) Recalculation of the prior savings adjustment during an agreement period.

(1) The ACO's prior savings adjustment is recalculated for changes to the ACO's savings or losses for a performance year used in the prior savings adjustment calculation in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315.

(2) For a new ACO identified as a re-entering ACO, the prior savings adjustment is recalculated for changes to savings or losses for a performance year used in the prior savings adjustment calculation, if the savings or losses of the ACO in which the majority of the new ACO's participants were participating change in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315.

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

107. Section 425.659 is added to subpart G to read as follows:

§ 425.659 Calculating risk scores used in Shared Savings Program benchmark calculations.

(a) General. CMS accounts for differences in severity and case mix of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries and assignable beneficiaries (as defined under § 425.20) in calculations used in establishing, adjusting and updating the ACO's historical benchmark.

(b) Prospective Hierarchical Condition Category (HCC) risk score calculation. In determining Medicare FFS beneficiary prospective HCC risk scores for a performance year and each benchmark year of the ACO's agreement period, CMS does the following:

(1) CMS specifies the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries (as defined under § 425.20) for use in Shared Savings Program calculations as follows:

(i) In calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for a performance year, CMS applies the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology applicable for the corresponding calendar year.

(ii) For agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, CMS applies the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology for the calendar year corresponding to benchmark year in calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for each benchmark year of the agreement period.

(iii) For agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, CMS applies the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology for the calendar year corresponding to the performance year, as specified under paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section, in calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for each benchmark year of the agreement period.

(2) CMS does the following to calculate the prospective HCC risk scores identified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section for a benchmark or performance year:

(i) Removes the Medicare Advantage coding intensity adjustment, if applicable.

(ii) Renormalizes prospective HCC risk scores by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries) based on a national assignable FFS population for the relevant benchmark or performance year.

(iii) Calculates the average prospective HCC risk score by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries).

PART 425—MEDICARE SHARED SAVINGS PROGRAM — amendatory instructions

108. Section 425.702 is amended—

a. In paragraph (c)(1)(ii) introductory text, by removing the phrase “process development” and adding in its place the phrase “protocol development”;

b. By revising paragraph (c)(1)(ii)(A)( 3 ); and

c. By adding paragraph (c)(1)(iii).

The revision and addition read as follows:

§ 425.702 Aggregate reports.

(c) * * *

(1) * * *

(ii) * * *

(A) * * *

( 3 ) Beneficiary identifier.

(iii) For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, at the beginning of the quality submission period, CMS, upon the ACO's request for the data for purposes of population-based activities relating to improving health or reducing growth in health care costs, protocol development, case management, and care coordination, provides the ACO with information about its fee-for-service population.

(A) The following information is made available to ACOs regarding beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20:

( 1 ) Beneficiary name.

( 2 ) Date of birth.

( 3 ) Beneficiary identifier.

( 4 ) Sex.

(B) Information in the following categories, which represents the minimum data necessary for ACOs to conduct health care operations work, is made available to ACOs regarding beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20:

( 1 ) Demographic data such as enrollment status.

( 2 ) Health status information such as risk profile and chronic condition subgroup.

( 3 ) Utilization rates of Medicare services such as the use of evaluation and management, hospital, emergency, and post-acute services, including the dates and place of service.
