G. Medicare Shared Savings Program

1. Executive Summary and Background

a. Purpose

Eligible groups of providers and suppliers, including physicians, hospitals, and other healthcare providers, may participate in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Shared Savings Program) by forming or joining an accountable care organization (ACO), and in so, doing agree to become accountable for the total cost and quality of care provided under Original Medicare to an assigned population of Medicare fee-for-service (FFS) beneficiaries. Under the Shared Savings Program, providers and suppliers that participate in an ACO continue to receive Medicare FFS payments under Parts A and B, and the ACO may be eligible to receive a shared savings payment if it meets specified quality and savings requirements, and in some instances may be required to share in losses if it increases health care spending.

As of January 1, 2023, 10.9 million people with Medicare receive care from one of the 573,126 health care providers in the 456 ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program, the largest value-based care program in the country. 207 While the Shared Savings Program experienced a decrease in the number of ACOs and assigned beneficiaries for 2023, the policies finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69777 through 69968) are expected to grow participation in the program for 2024 and beyond, when many of the new policies are set to go into effect. These policies are expected to drive growth in participation, particularly in rural and underserved areas, promote equity, advance alignment across accountable care initiatives, and increase the number of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs participating in the program by up to four million over the next several years. 208 Accordingly, we expect these recently finalized changes will support CMS in achieving its goal of having 100 percent of people with Original Medicare in a care relationship with accountability for quality and total cost of care by 2030. 209

207 Refer to CMS, Shared Savings Program Fast Facts—As of January 1, 2023, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2023-shared-savings-program-fast-facts.pdf.

208 See CMS Press Release, “CMS Announces Increase in 2023 in Organizations and Beneficiaries Benefiting from Coordinated Care in Accountable Care Relationship”, January 17, 2023, available at https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/cms-announces-increase-2023-organizations-and-beneficiaries-benefiting-coordinated-care-accountable.

209 Ibid. See also, Seshamani M., Fowler E., Brooks-LaSure C., Building On The CMS Strategic Vision: Working Together For A Stronger Medicare. Health Affairs. January 11, 2022. Available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/forefront.20220110.198444. CMS, Innovation Center Strategy Refresh, available at https://innovation.cms.gov/strategic-direction-whitepaper (Innovation Center Strategic Objective 1: Drive Accountable Care, pages 13-17).

To further advance Medicare's overall value-based care strategy of growth, alignment, and equity, and to respond to concerns raised by ACOs and other interested parties, we proposed changes to the Shared Savings Program as described in section III.G. of the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52416 through 52498), and we sought public comments which we summarize and respond to in sections III.G.2. through III.G.8. of this final rule. We proposed changes to the quality performance standard and reporting requirements under the Alternative Payment Model (APM) Performance Pathway (APP) within the Quality Payment Program (QPP) that would continue to move ACOs toward digital measurement of quality and align with the QPP. Further, we proposed to add a third step to the step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology under which we would use an expanded period of time to identify whether a beneficiary has met the requirement for having received a primary care service from a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO to allow additional beneficiaries to be eligible for assignment, as well as proposing related changes to how we identify assignable beneficiaries used in certain Shared Savings Program calculations. Additionally, we proposed updates to the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment to remain consistent with billing and coding guidelines. We also proposed refinements to the financial benchmarking methodology for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, to cap the risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area when calculating regional trends used to update the historical benchmark at the time of financial reconciliation for symmetry with the cap on ACO risk score growth; further mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustment on the benchmark to encourage participation by ACOs caring for medically complex, high-cost beneficiaries; specify the circumstances in which CMS would recalculate the prior savings adjustment for changes in values used in benchmark calculations due to compliance action taken to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, or as a result of the issuance of a revised initial determination of financial performance for a previous performance year following a reopening of ACO shared savings and shared losses calculations; and apply the same CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology applicable to the calendar year corresponding to the performance year in calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for each benchmark year. We also proposed to refine our policies for the newly established advance investment payments (AIP) and to make updates to other programmatic areas, including the program's eligibility requirements, and make timely technical changes to the regulations for clarity and consistency. Lastly, we solicited comments on potential future developments to Shared Savings Program policies, including with respect to incorporating a new track that would offer a higher level of risk and potential reward than currently available under the ENHANCED track, refining the three-way blended benchmark update factor and the prior savings adjustment, and promoting ACO and community-based organization (CBO) collaboration.

b. Statutory and Regulatory Background on the Shared Savings Program

On March 23, 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Pub. L. 111-148) was enacted, followed by enactment of the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (Pub. L. 111-152) on March 30, 2010, which amended certain provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (hereinafter collectively referred to as “the Affordable Care Act”). Section 3022 of the Affordable Care Act amended Title XVIII of the Act (42 U.S.C. 1395 et seq. ) by adding section 1899 of the Act to establish the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Shared Savings Program) to facilitate coordination and cooperation among healthcare providers to improve the quality of care for Medicare FFS beneficiaries and reduce the rate of growth in expenditures under Medicare Parts A and B. (See 42 U.S.C. 1395jjj.)

Section 1899 of the Act has been amended through subsequent legislation. The requirements for assignment of Medicare FFS beneficiaries to ACOs participating under the program were amended by the 21st Century Cures Act (the CURES Act) (Pub. L. 114-255, December 13, 2016). The Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 (Pub. L. 115-123, February 9, 2018), further amended section 1899 of the Act to provide for the following: expanded use of telehealth services by physicians or practitioners participating in an applicable ACO to furnish services to prospectively assigned beneficiaries; greater flexibility in the assignment of Medicare FFS beneficiaries to ACOs by allowing ACOs in tracks under retrospective beneficiary assignment a choice of prospective assignment for the agreement period; permitting Medicare FFS beneficiaries to voluntarily identify an ACO professional as their primary care provider and requiring that such beneficiaries be notified of the ability to make and change such identification, and mandating that any such voluntary identification will supersede claims-based assignment; and allowing ACOs under certain two-sided risk models to establish CMS-approved beneficiary incentive programs.

The Shared Savings Program regulations are codified at 42 CFR part 425. The final rule establishing the Shared Savings Program appeared in the November 2, 2011 Federal Register (Medicare Program; Medicare Shared Savings Program: Accountable Care Organizations; final rule (76 FR 67802) (hereinafter referred to as the “November 2011 final rule”)). A subsequent major update to the program rules appeared in the June 9, 2015 Federal Register (Medicare Program; Medicare Shared Savings Program: Accountable Care Organizations; final rule (80 FR 32692) (hereinafter referred to as the “June 2015 final rule”)). The final rule entitled, “Medicare Program; Medicare Shared Savings Program; Accountable Care Organizations—Revised Benchmark Rebasing Methodology, Facilitating Transition to Performance-Based Risk, and Administrative Finality of Financial Calculations,” which addressed changes related to the program's financial benchmark methodology, appeared in the June 10, 2016 Federal Register (81 FR 37950) (hereinafter referred to as the “June 2016 final rule”). A final rule, “Medicare Program; Revisions to Payment Policies Under the Physician Fee Schedule and Other Revisions to Part B for CY 2019; Medicare Shared Savings Program Requirements; Quality Payment Program; Medicaid Promoting Interoperability Program; Quality Payment Program—Extreme and Uncontrollable Circumstance Policy for the 2019 MIPS Payment Year; Provisions From the Medicare Shared Savings Program—Accountable Care Organizations—Pathways to Success; and Expanding the Use of Telehealth Services for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder Under the Substance Use-Disorder Prevention That Promotes Opioid Recovery and Treatment (SUPPORT) for Patients and Communities Act”, appeared in the November 23, 2018 Federal Register (83 FR 59452) (hereinafter referred to as the “November 2018 final rule” or the “CY 2019 PFS final rule”). In the November 2018 final rule, we finalized a voluntary 6-month extension for existing ACOs whose participation agreements would otherwise expire on December 31, 2018; allowed beneficiaries greater flexibility in designating their primary care provider and in the use of that designation for purposes of assigning the beneficiary to an ACO if the clinician they align with is participating in an ACO; revised the definition of primary care services used in beneficiary assignment; provided relief for ACOs and their clinicians impacted by extreme and uncontrollable circumstances in performance year 2018 and subsequent years; established a new Certified Electronic Health Record Technology (CEHRT) use threshold requirement; and reduced the Shared Savings Program quality measure set from 31 to 23 measures (83 FR 59940 through 59990 and 59707 through 59715).

A final rule redesigning the Shared Savings Program appeared in the December 31, 2018 Federal Register (Medicare Program: Medicare Shared Savings Program; Accountable Care Organizations—Pathways to Success and Extreme and Uncontrollable Circumstances Policies for Performance Year 2017; final rule (83 FR 67816) (hereinafter referred to as the “December 2018 final rule”)). In the December 2018 final rule, we finalized a number of policies for the Shared Savings Program, including a redesign of the participation options available under the program to encourage ACOs to transition to two-sided risk models; new tools to support coordination of care across settings and strengthen beneficiary engagement; and revisions to ensure rigorous benchmarking.

In the interim final rule with comment period (IFC) entitled “Medicare and Medicaid Programs; Policy and Regulatory Revisions in Response to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency”, which was effective on the March 31, 2020 date of display and appeared in the April 6, 2020 Federal Register (85 FR 19230) (hereinafter referred to as the “March 31, 2020 COVID-19 IFC”), we removed the restriction that prevented the application of the Shared Savings Program extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy for disasters that occur during the quality reporting period if the reporting period is extended to offer relief under the Shared Savings Program to all ACOs that may be unable to completely and accurately report quality data for 2019 due to the PHE for COVID-19 (85 FR 19267 and 19268).

In the IFC entitled “Medicare and Medicaid Programs; Basic Health Program, and Exchanges; Additional Policy and Regulatory Revisions in Response to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency and Delay of Certain Reporting Requirements for the Skilled Nursing Facility Quality Reporting Program” which was effective on May 8, 2020, and appeared in the May 8, 2020 Federal Register (85 FR 27550) (hereinafter referred to as the “May 8, 2020 COVID-19 IFC”), we modified Shared Savings Program policies to: (1) allow ACOs whose agreement periods expired on December 31, 2020, the option to extend their existing agreement period by 1-year, and allow ACOs in the BASIC track's glide path the option to elect to maintain their current level of participation for performance year 2021; (2) adjust program calculations to remove payment amounts for episodes of care for treatment of COVID-19; and (3) expand the definition of primary care services for purposes of determining beneficiary assignment to include telehealth codes for virtual check-ins, e-visits, and telephonic communication. We also clarified the applicability of the program's extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy to mitigate shared losses for the period of the PHE for COVID-19 starting in January 2020 (85 FR 27573 through 27587).

We have also made use of the annual CY PFS rules to address quality reporting for the Shared Savings Program and certain other issues. For summaries of certain policies finalized in prior PFS rules, refer to the CY 2020 PFS proposed rule (84 FR 40705), the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84717), the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65253 and 65254), and the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69779 and 69780). In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69777 through 69968), we finalized changes to Shared Savings Program policies, including to: provide advance shared savings payments in the form of advance investment payments to certain new, low revenue ACOs that can be used to support their participation in the Shared Savings Program; provide greater flexibility in the progression to performance-based risk; establish a health equity adjustment to an ACO's Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) quality performance category score used to determine shared savings and losses to recognize high quality performance by ACOs serving a higher proportion of underserved populations; incorporate a sliding scale reflecting an ACO's quality performance for use in determining shared savings for ACOs, and revise the approach for determining shared losses for ENHANCED track ACOs; modify the benchmarking methodology to strengthen financial incentives for long term participation by reducing the impact of ACOs' performance and market penetration on their benchmarks, and to support the business case for ACOs serving high-risk and high dually eligible populations to participate, as well as mitigate bias in regional expenditure calculations for ACOs electing prospective assignment; expand opportunities for certain low revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track to share in savings; make changes to policies within other programmatic areas, including the program's beneficiary assignment methodology, requirements related to marketing material review and beneficiary notifications, the SNF 3-day rule waiver application, and data sharing requirements.

Policies applicable to Shared Savings Program ACOs for purposes of reporting for other programs have also continued to evolve based on changes in the statute. The Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA) (Pub. L. 114-10, April 16, 2015) established the Quality Payment Program. In the CY 2017 Quality Payment Program final rule with comment period (81 FR 77008), we established regulations for the MIPS and Advanced APMs and related policies applicable to eligible clinicians who participate in APMs, including the Shared Savings Program. We have also made updates to policies under the Quality Payment Program through the annual CY PFS rules.

c. Summary of Shared Savings Program Provisions

In sections III.G.2. through III.G.7. of this final rule, we summarize and respond to public comments received on the proposed modifications to the Shared Savings Program's policies discussed in section III.G. of the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52416 through 52498). Some commenters' suggestions for modifications to Shared Savings Program policies went beyond the scope of the proposals discussed in section III.G. of the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule and will not be addressed in this section of this final rule. As a general summary, we are finalizing the following changes to Shared Savings Program policies to:

• Revise the quality reporting and the quality performance requirements (section III.G.2. of this final rule), including the following:

++ Allow Shared Savings Program ACOs the option to report quality measures under the APP on only their Medicare beneficiaries through Medicare CQMs (section III.G.2.b. of this final rule).

++ Update the APP measure set for Shared Savings Program ACOs (section III.G.2.c. of this final rule).

++ Revise the calculation of the health equity adjustment underserved multiplier (section III.G.2.d. of this final rule).

++ Use historical data to establish the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard (section III.G.2.e. of this final rule).

++ Apply a Shared Savings Program scoring policy for excluded APP measures and APP measures that lack a benchmark (section III.G.2.f. of this final rule).

++ Require Spanish language administration of the CAHPS for MIPS survey (section III.G.2.g. of this final rule).

++ Align CEHRT requirements for Shared Savings Program ACOs with MIPS (section III.G.2.h. of this final rule).

++ Revise the requirement to meet the case minimum requirement for quality performance standard determinations (section III.G.2.j. of this final rule).

• Revise the policies for determining beneficiary assignment (section III.G.3 of this final rule).

++ Modify the step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology and approach to identifying the assignable beneficiary population (section III.G.3.a of this final rule).

++ Update the definition of primary care services used in beneficiary assignment at § 425.400(c) (section III.G.3.b of this final rule).

• Revise the policies on the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology (section III.G.4 of this final rule).

++ Modify the calculation of the regional update factor used to update the historical benchmark between benchmark year (BY) 3 and the performance year by capping an ACO's regional service area risk score growth through use of an adjustment factor to provide more equitable treatment for ACOs and for symmetry with the cap on ACO risk score growth (section III.G.4.b of this final rule).

++ Further mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustment on the benchmark to encourage participation by ACOs caring for medically complex, high-cost beneficiaries (section III.G.4.c of this final rule).

++ Specify the circumstances in which CMS will recalculate the prior savings adjustment for changes in values used in benchmark calculations due to compliance action taken to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, or as a result of the issuance of a revised initial determination of financial performance for a previous performance year (section III.G.4.d of this final rule).

++ Specify use of the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology applicable to the calendar year corresponding to the performance year in calculating prospective HCC risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for the performance year, and for each benchmark year of the ACO's agreement period (section III.G.4.e. of this final rule).

• Refine AIP policies, including the following (section III.G.5 of this final rule):

++ Modify AIP eligibility requirements to allow an ACO to elect to advance to a two-sided model level of the BASIC track's glide path beginning with the third performance year of the 5-year agreement period in which the ACO receives advance investment payments.

++ Modify AIP recoupment and recovery polices to forgo immediate collection of advance investment payments from an ACO that terminates its participation agreement early in order to early renew under a new participation agreement to continue its participation in the Shared Savings Program.

++ Modify termination policies to specify that CMS will immediately terminate advance investment payments to an ACO for future quarters if the ACO voluntarily terminates its participation agreement.

++ Modify ACO reporting requirements to require ACOs to submit spend plan updates and actual spend information to CMS in addition to publicly reporting such information.

++ Modify AIP requirements to permit ACOs to seek reconsideration review of all quarterly payment calculations.

• Update Shared Savings Program eligibility requirements, including the following (section III.G.6 of this final rule):

++ Remove the option for ACOs to request an exception to the shared governance requirement that 75 percent control of an ACO's governing body must be held by ACO participants.

++ Codify the existing Shared Savings Program operational approach to specify that CMS determines that an ACO participant TIN participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if it was or will be included on a participant list used in financial reconciliation for a performance year under performance-based risk during the five most recent performance years.

• Make technical changes to references in Shared Savings Program regulations (section III.G.7 of this final rule), including to update assignment selection references to either § 425.226(a)(1) or § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) in subpart G of the regulations, correct typographical errors in the definitions in § 425.20, and update certain terminology used in § 425.702.

We solicited comments in the CY 2024 proposed rule regarding our intent to propose future policies aligning the APP measure set for Sharing Savings Program ACOs with the quality measures under the “Universal Foundation” beginning in performance year 2025 (as described in section III.G.2.b.(2). of this final rule). We also solicited comments on MIPS Value Pathway reporting for specialists in Shared Savings Program ACOs (as described in section III.G.2.i. of this final rule).

In addition, in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, we solicited comments on potential future developments to Shared Savings Program policies (as discussed in section III.G.8. of this final rule), including: incorporating a track with higher risk and potential reward than the ENHANCED track; modifying the amount of the prior savings adjustment through potential changes to the 50 percent scaling factor used in determining the adjustment, as well as considerations for potential modifications to the positive regional adjustment to reduce the possibility of inflating the benchmark; potential refinements to the Accountable Care Prospective Trend (ACPT) and the three-way blended benchmark update factor over time to further mitigate potential ratchet effects within the update factor; and policies to promote ACO and CBO collaboration.

In combination, the policies we are adopting for the Shared Savings Program in this final rule are anticipated to improve the incentive for ACOs to sustainably participate and earn shared savings in the program. On net, total program spending is estimated to decrease by $330 million over the 10-year period 2024 through 2033. These changes are also anticipated to support the goals outlined in the CY 2023 PFS final rule for growing the program with a particular focus on including underserved beneficiaries.

Certain policies, including both existing policies and the new policies adopted in this final rule, rely upon the authority granted in section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to use other payment models that the Secretary determines will improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare program, and that do not result in program expenditures greater than those that would result under the statutory payment model. The following policies require the use of our authority under section 1899(i) of the Act: the modifications to the calculation of regional component of the three-way blended update factor to cap regional service area risk score growth for symmetry with the ACO risk score growth cap, as described in section III.G.4.b of this final rule and the refinements to AIP policies as described in section III.G.5. of this final rule. Further, certain existing policies adopted under the authority of section 1899(i)(3) of the Act that depend on use of the assigned population and assignable beneficiary populations will be affected by the addition of a new third step of the beneficiary assignment methodology and the revisions to the definition of “assignable beneficiary” described in section III.G.3. of this final rule, including the following: the amount of advance investment payments; factors used in determining shared losses for ACOs under two-sided risk models (including calculation of the variable MSR/MLR based on the ACO's number of assigned beneficiaries, and the applicability of the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy for mitigating shared losses for ACOs under two-sided risk models); and calculation of the ACPT, regional and national components of the three-way blended benchmark update factor. As described in the Regulatory Impact Analysis in section VI. and elsewhere in this final rule, the changes we are finalizing to our payment methodology are expected to improve the quality and efficiency of care and are not expected to result in a situation in which the payment methodology under the Shared Savings Program, including all policies adopted under the authority of section 1899(i) of the Act, results in more spending under the program than would have resulted under the statutory payment methodology in section 1899(d) of the Act. We will continue to reexamine this projection in the future to ensure that the requirement under section 1899(i)(3)(B) of the Act that an alternative payment model not result in additional program expenditures continues to be satisfied. In the event that we later determine that the payment model that includes policies established under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act no longer meets this requirement, we would undertake additional notice and comment rulemaking to make adjustments to the payment model to assure continued compliance with the statutory requirements.

2. Quality Performance Standard and Other Reporting Requirements

a. Background

Section 1899(b)(3)(C) of the Act states that the Secretary shall establish quality performance standards to assess the quality of care furnished by ACOs and seek to improve the quality of care furnished by ACOs over time by specifying higher standards, new measures, or both for purposes of assessing such quality of care. As we stated in the November 2011 final rule establishing the Shared Savings Program (76 FR 67872), our principal goal in selecting quality measures for ACOs has been to identify measures of success in the delivery of high-quality health care at the individual and population levels. In the November 2011 final rule, we established a quality measure set spanning four domains: patient experience of care, care coordination/patient safety, preventative health, and at-risk population (76 FR 67872 through 67891). We have subsequently updated the measures that comprise the quality performance measure set for the Shared Savings Program through rulemaking in the CY 2015, 2016, 2017, 2019, and 2023 PFS final rules (79 FR 67907 through 67921, 80 FR 71263 through 71269, 81 FR 80484 through 80488, 83 FR 59707 through 59715, 87 FR 69860 through 69763, respectively).

b. Option for Shared Savings Program ACOs To Report Medicare CQMs

(1) Background

In the CY 2021 PFS final rule, we finalized modifications to the Shared Savings Program quality reporting requirements and quality performance standard for performance year 2021 and subsequent performance years (85 FR 84720). For performance year 2021 and subsequent years, ACOs are required to report quality data via the Alternative Payment Model (APM) Performance Pathway (APP). Pursuant to policies finalized under the CY 2022 and CY 2023 PFS (86 FR 65685; 87 FR 69858), to meet the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program through performance year 2024, ACOs must report the ten CMS Web Interface measures or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and the CAHPS for MIPS survey. In performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, ACOs must report the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and the CAHPS for MIPS survey.

Since the CY 2021 PFS final rule was issued, interested parties have continued to express concerns about requiring ACOs to report all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs via the APP due to the cost of purchasing and implementing a system wide infrastructure to aggregate data from multiple ACO participant TINs and varying EHR systems (86 FR 65257). In the CY 2022 PFS, commenters supported our acknowledgement of the complexity of the transition to all payer/all patient eCQM/MIPS CQMs (86 FR 65259). Additionally, one commenter questioned how data completeness standards could be met, given the issues of deduplication and patients adding or moving insurance coverage (87 FR 65260). In public comments to the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, some commenters expressed multiple concerns regarding the requirement to report all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMS beginning in performance year 2025, such as issues related to meeting all payer data requirements, data completeness requirements, data aggregation and deduplication issues, and interoperability issues among different EHRs (87 FR 69837). In the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we explained these comments went beyond the scope of our proposals. These comment letters included details of the commenters' concerns. Specifically, some commenters, which included ACOs, noted the financial burden of aggregating, deduplicating, and exporting eCQM data across multiple TINs and EHRs. Commenters, including ACOs, expressed concerns that the requirement to report all payer measures ties performance to patients that the ACO does not actively manage, increases the difficulty of meeting data completeness, and may negatively impact an ACO's performance by including patients seen by specialists. We also acknowledged that as the transition to reporting all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs continues, the health equity adjustment which we finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69842) will support ACOs that may experience challenges with the new quality reporting requirement and will provide an incentive for ACOs to serve underserved populations during the transition to reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. In the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we stated that we are continuing to monitor the impact of these policies as we gain more experience with ACOs reporting all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and, further, that we are exploring how to address some of the concerns related to data aggregation and the all payer requirement and may revisit these and related issues in future rulemaking based on lessons learned (87 FR 69833).

Consistent with our goal to support ACOs in the transition to all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, in the CY 2023 PFS final rule we extended the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive through PY 2024 to provide an incentive to ACOs to report the eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, while allowing them time to gauge their performance on the eCQMs/MIPS CQMs before full reporting of these measures is required beginning in performance year 2025 (87 FR 69835). Building on our goal to provide technical support to ACOs and to help ACOs build the skills necessary to aggregate and match patient data to report all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMS, in December 2022, we hosted a webinar to support ACOs in the transition to reporting all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and released a guidance document on the topic. Resources from the “Reporting MIPS CQMs and eCQMs in the APM Performance Pathway” webinar are available at https://youtu.be/LDrpoGnnRQs. The guidance document, entitled “Medicare Shared Savings Program: Reporting MIPS CQMs and eCQMs in the Alternative Payment Model Performance Pathway (APP)” is available in the Quality Payment Program Resource Library at https://qpp-cm-prod-content.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/2179/APP%20Guidance%20Document%20for%20ACOs.pdf. We are committed to continuing to support ACOs in the transition to all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and in the transition to digital quality measurement reporting.

(2) Reporting the Medicare CQMs

In light of the concerns raised by ACOs and other interested parties and our commitment to supporting ACOs in the transition to digital quality measure reporting, for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years as determined by CMS, we proposed in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule to establish the Medicare CQMs for Accountable Care Organizations Participating in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Medicare CQMs) as a new collection type for Shared Savings Program ACOs reporting on the Medicare CQMs (reporting quality data on beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20) within the APP measure set and administering the CAHPS for MIPS Survey as required under the APP (88 FR 52420 through 52424). As stated in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52420), Medicare CQMs would serve as a transition collection type to help some ACOs build the infrastructure, skills, knowledge, and expertise necessary to report all payer/all patient MIPS CQMs and eCQMs by defining a population of beneficiaries that exist within the all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications and tethering that population to claims encounters with ACO professionals with specialties used in assignment. Specifically, we believe that Medicare CQMs would address the concern raised by ACOs that—for ACOs with a higher proportion of specialty practices and/or multiple EHR systems—the broader all payer/all patient eligible population would capture beneficiaries with no primary care relationship to the ACO. Further, we believe that ACOs, particularly ACOs with a higher proportion of specialty practices and/or multiple EHRs, would be able to utilize Medicare Part A and B claims data to help identify the ACO's eligible population and validate the ACO's patient matching and deduplication efforts. For these reasons, we believe that it is appropriate to establish Medicare CQMs as a new collection type for Shared Savings Program ACOs only.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52420), we stated that we recognized that Medicare CQMs might not be the most suitable collection type for some ACOs, particularly ACOs with a single-EHR platform, a high proportion of primary care practices, and/or ACOs composed of participants with experience reporting all payer/all patient measures in traditional MIPS. We also encouraged ACOs to evaluate all quality reporting options to determine which collection type is most appropriate based on the ACO's unique composition and technical infrastructure. In addition to our proposal to report quality data utilizing the Medicare CQMs collection type, in performance year 2024, ACOs would have the option to report quality data utilizing the CMS Web Interface measures, eCQMs, and/or MIPS CQMs collection types (88 FR 52420). As described in our proposal, in performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years as determined by CMS, ACOs would have the option to report quality data utilizing the eCQMs, MIPS CQMs, and/or Medicare CQMs collection types (88 FR 52420).

We stated in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52421) that our long-term goal continues to be to support ACOs in the adoption of all payer/all patient measures. We would monitor the reporting of quality data utilizing the Medicare CQMs collection type. For example, one indicator to evaluate Medicare CQMs would be to assess if there are any Medicare CQMs topped out as described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(iv). Therefore, in the 4th year the measure could be removed and would no longer be available for reporting during the performance period (83 FR 59761). Once the measure has reached an extremely topped out status (for example, a measure with an average mean performance within the 98th to 100th percentile range), we may propose the measure for removal in the next rulemaking cycle, regardless of whether or not it is in the midst of the topped out measure lifecycle, due to the extremely high and unvarying performance where meaningful distinctions and improvement in performance can no longer be made, after taking into account any other relevant factors (83 FR 59763). Separately, we may specify higher standards, new measures, or both—up to and including proposing to sunset the Medicare CQM collection type in future rulemaking—to ensure that Medicare CQMs conform to the intent of section 1899(b)(3)(C) of the Act and the priorities established in the CMS National Quality Strategy (88 FR 52421).

We also remain steadfast in our commitment to support providers in the transition from traditional MIPS to APMs and Advanced APMs. In our proposal, we acknowledged that Medicare CQMs may not be the preferred collection type for all ACOs. ACOs that are composed of participants with experience reporting all payer/all patient measures in traditional MIPS would continue to have the option to report all payer/all patient measures (88 FR 52421). In supporting providers in the transition from traditional MIPS to APMs and Advanced APMs, we also recognized the corresponding need to support ACOs in the transition to all payer/all patient reporting (88 FR 52421). In addition to the technical support that we would continue to provide ACOs, we believe that the Medicare CQM collection type would aid some ACOs in the transition to all payer/all patient measures by allowing ACOs to focus patient matching and data aggregation efforts on ACO professionals with specialties used in assignment while the ACO builds the infrastructure necessary to report on a broader eligible population (88 FR 52421).

To facilitate the reporting of Medicare CQMs, we proposed to amend the definition of “Collection Type” to include the Medicare CQM as an available collection type in MIPS for ACOs that participate in the Shared Savings Program (88 FR 52563). We noted that the Medicare CQMs collection type would serve as a transition collection type and be available as determined by CMS (88 FR 52421). Additionally, we proposed to establish data submission and completeness criteria pertaining to the Medicare CQMs for the MIPS quality performance category (88 FR 52567).

A Medicare CQM is essentially a MIPS CQM reported by an ACO under the APP on only the ACO's Medicare FFS beneficiaries, instead of its all payer/all patient population. We proposed to define a beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs at § 425.20 as a beneficiary identified for purposes of reporting Medicare CQMs who is either of the following:

• A Medicare FFS beneficiary (as defined at § 425.20) who—

++ Meets the criteria for a beneficiary to be assigned to an ACO described at § 425.401(a); and

++ Had at least one claim with a date of service during the measurement period from an ACO professional who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c), or who is a physician assistant (PA), nurse practitioner (NP), or clinical nurse specialist (CNS).

• A Medicare FFS beneficiary who is assigned to an ACO in accordance with § 425.402(e) because the beneficiary designated an ACO professional participating in an ACO as responsible for coordinating their overall care.

While this definition refers to beneficiaries that have been assigned to an ACO, it nonetheless differs from our basic assignment methodology described under subpart E and from the concept of assignable beneficiary defined at § 425.20. Specifically, the use of the terms of “claim” (instead of primary care services) and “measurement period” (instead of assignment window) in the definition are synchronous with the application of all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications in reporting Medicare CQMs. For example, we define primary care services as the set of services identified by the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) and revenue center codes designated under § 425.400(c). Each all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specification identifies eligible encounters that, in part, identify patients that should be included in the measure's eligible population.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, we stated that our proposed definition for beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs is intended to create alignment with the all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications (88 FR 52421). The HCPCS and revenue center codes designated under § 425.400(c) as primary care services for purposes of assignment under the Shared Savings Program only partially overlap with the codes designated as eligible encounters used to identify the eligible population in all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications (88 FR 52421). Applying primary care service codes or deferring to the basic assignment methodology under subpart E to identify the beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs would have the unintended result of limiting the codes used to identify eligible encounters in the Medicare CQM Specification to only the codes that overlap with primary care services (88 FR 52421). Similarly, we defined the assignment window as the 12-month period used to assign beneficiaries to the ACO. In a manner that is identical to the all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications, the Medicare CQM Specifications would identify the measurement period applicable to each measure (88 FR 52421). Applying the 12-month period used in assignment or deferring to the basic assignment methodology under Subpart E to identify the beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs would have the unintended result of reducing the beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs to only patients that had an eligible encounter during the overlap of the assignment window as defined at § 425.20 and the measurement period as defined in the Medicare CQM Specifications (88 FR 52421).

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, we proposed to establish the data completeness criteria threshold for the Medicare CQM collection type, in which a Shared Savings Program ACO that meets the reporting requirements under the APP would submit quality measure data for Medicare CQMs on the APM Entity's applicable beneficiaries eligible for the Medicare CQMs, as proposed at § 425.20, who meet the measure's denominator criteria (88 FR 52567). We also proposed the following data completeness criteria thresholds for Medicare CQMs:

• At least 75 percent for the CY 2024, CY 2025, and CY 2026 performance periods/2026, 2027, and 2028 MIPS payment years, respectively.

• At least 80 percent for the CY 2027 performance period/2029 MIPS payment year.

With the Medicare CQMs collection type serving as a transition collection type under the APP that would be available as determined by CMS, we proposed in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule to establish the aforementioned data completeness criteria thresholds in advance of the applicable performance periods (88 FR 52567). In our proposal, we recognized that it is advantageous to delineate the expectations for ACOs as they prepare to meet the quality reporting requirements for the Medicare CQMs collection type under the APP (88 FR 52421). We would assess the availability of the Medicare CQM as a collection type under the APP during the initial years of implementation and determine the timeframe to sunset the Medicare CQM as a collection type in future rulemaking.

As described in our proposal, an ACO that reports Medicare CQMs in an applicable performance year would aggregate patient data for beneficiaries who are eligible for Medicare CQMs, as proposed at § 425.20, across all ACO participants (88 FR 52422). The ACO would then match the aggregated patient data with each Medicare CQM Specification to identify the eligible population for each measure. The ACO's aggregated ACO submission must account for 100 percent of the eligible and matched patient population across all ACO participants. Data completeness is calculated based on submitted data. We believe that the proposal to establish the Medicare CQM collection type would address the concerns from ACOs regarding the capability of meeting the data completeness requirement for all payer data. Specifically, our proposal to define beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs aims to focus ACOs' reporting efforts on beneficiaries with an encounter with an ACO professional with a specialty used in assignment and thereby reduce the potential for missing or un-matched patient data. It is important to note that ACOs that include or are composed solely of FQHCs or RHCs must report quality data on behalf of the FQHCs or RHCs that participate in the ACO. To clarify, while FQHCs and RHCs that provide services that are billed exclusively under FQHC or RHC payment methodologies are exempt from reporting traditional MIPS, FQHCs and RHCs that participate in APMs, such as the Shared Savings Program, are considered APM Entity groups described at § 414.1370.

To facilitate population-based activities related to improving health through quality measurement of Medicare CQMs and to aid ACOs in the process of patient matching and data aggregation necessary to report Medicare CQMs, we stated in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule that we would provide ACOs a list of beneficiaries who are eligible for Medicare CQMs within the ACO. As set forth in our regulations at § 425.702, we share certain aggregate reports with ACOs under specific conditions, and this information includes demographic data that represents the minimum data necessary for ACOs to conduct health care operations work, which includes demographic and diagnostic information necessary to report quality data. We proposed that the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs to be shared once annually, at the beginning of the quality data submission period (88 FR 52422). Since we would not have full run-out on performance year claims data prior to the start of the quality data submission period, the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs would not be a complete list of beneficiaries that should be included on an ACO's Medicare CQMs reporting. ACOs would have to ensure that all beneficiaries that meet the applicable Medicare CQM Specification and also meet the definition of a beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs proposed under § 425.20 are included in the ACO's eligible population/denominator for reporting each Medicare CQM. We proposed to add new paragraph (c)(1)(iii) to § 425.702 as follows:

For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, at the beginning of the quality submission period, CMS, upon the ACO's request for the data for purposes of population-based activities relating to improving health or reducing growth in health care costs, protocol development, case management, and care coordination, provides the ACO with information about its FFS population.

• The following information is made available to ACOs regarding beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20:

++ Beneficiary name.

++ Date of birth.

++ Beneficiary identifier.

++ Sex.

• Information in the following categories, which represents the minimum data necessary for ACOs to conduct health care operations work, is made available to ACOs regarding beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20:

++ Demographic data such as enrollment status.

++ Health status information such as risk profile and chronic condition subgroup.

++ Utilization rates of Medicare services such as the use of evaluation and management, hospital, emergency, and post-acute services, including the dates and place of service.

The list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs shared by CMS would aim to help ACOs aggregate, and match and deduplicate patient data. We proposed including the minimum data necessary to facilitate the reporting of Medicare CQMs including beneficiary identifier, gender, date of birth and death (if applicable), chronic condition subgroup, and the NPIs of the top three frequented providers in the ACO (88 FR 52422). We also proposed to include health status information such as risk profile and chronic condition subgroup to the extent that such data would aid ACOs in identifying patients that meet the denominator criteria for the Medicare CQM Specifications (88 FR 52422). We would also provide technical assistance to ACOs when reporting the Medicare CQMs, including providing technical resource documents. Our proposal to create Medicare CQMs is intended to support ACOs through the transition to reporting the all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and to facilitate quality assessment improvement activities (as described in the definition of health care operations at 45 CFR 164.501) since we would provide ACOs with a list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQM reporting to aid in patient matching and data deduplication.

In the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84733), we finalized the following three all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs under the APP for performance year 2021 and subsequent performance years:

• Quality ID#: 001 Diabetes: Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) Poor Control;

• Quality ID#: 134 Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-Up Plan; and

• Quality ID#: 236 Controlling High Blood Pressure.

In section IV.A.4.e of the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52422), we proposed to add these measures as Medicare CQMs to the APP measure set for Shared Savings Program ACOs beginning with performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. ACOs may report the three Medicare CQMs, or a combination of eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, to meet the Shared Savings Program quality reporting requirement at § 425.510(b) and the quality performance standard at § 425.512(a)(5).

As a result, to meet the Shared Savings Program reporting requirements:

• For performance year 2024, an ACO would be required to report the 10 measures under the CMS web interface measures, or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs. In addition, an ACO would be required to administer the CAHPS for MIPS Survey, and CMS will calculate the two claims-based measures.

• For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, an ACO would be required to report the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs. In addition, an ACO would be required to administer the CAHPS for MIPS Survey, and CMS will calculate the two claims-based measures.

ACOs may still report via the APP using the all payer/all patient eCQM/MIPS CQM collection types and may report different collection types for each measure.

In conjunction with the proposed changes to § 425.512(a)(2), we proposed to incorporate Medicare CQMs into the existing quality performance standard policies for new ACOs at § 425.512(a)(2)(i), (ii), and (iii) (88 FR 52423). Accordingly, we proposed that for the first performance year of an ACO's first agreement period under the Shared Savings Program, if the ACO reports data via the APP and meets MIPS data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1), the ACO will meet the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program, if:

• For performance year 2024. The ACO reports the 10 CMS Web Interface measures or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, and administers a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP.

• For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years. The ACO reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and administers a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP.

Additionally, we proposed to incorporate Medicare CQMs into the existing policies at § 425.512(a)(5)(iii) for when an ACO would not meet the quality performance standard or the alternative quality performance standard. Accordingly, we proposed that an ACO would not meet the quality performance standard or the alternative quality performance standard if:

• For performance year 2024, if an ACO (1) does not report any of the 10 CMS Web Interface measures or any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and (2) does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP.

• For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, if an ACO (1) does not report any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and (2) does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey under the APP.

We did not propose to add Medicare CQMs to the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive described at § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ) for performance year 2024. The eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive intends to provide an incentive to ACOs to report the all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs while allowing them time to gauge their performance on the all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs before full reporting of these measures is required beginning in performance year 2025.

Under the goals of the CMS National Quality Strategy, we are moving towards a building-block approach to streamline quality measure across CMS quality programs for the adult and pediatric populations. This “Universal Foundation” of quality measure would focus provider attention, reduce burden, identify disparities in care, prioritize development of interoperable, digital quality measures, allow for cross-comparisons across programs, and help identify measurement gaps. Following in the proposals under MIPS, we intend to propose future policies aligning the APP measure set for Sharing Savings Program ACOs with the quality measures under the “Universal Foundation” beginning in performance year 2025. These Universal Foundation measures are proposed to be adopted into the existing the Value in Primary Care MVP as discussed in Table B.11 of Appendix 3: MVP Inventory of the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52423). By creating alignment with the Universal Foundation in the Value in Primary Care MVP and the APP measure set by 2025, primary care clinicians would develop familiarity with the same quality measures that are reported in the APP while in MIPS. We expect this alignment would reduce the barriers to participation in the Shared Savings Program. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: Many commenters supported the proposal to establish the Medicare CQMs as a new collection type for Shared Savings Program ACOs. Several commenters were supportive of our proposal that Medicare CQMs would be reported by Shared Savings Program ACOs on only the ACO's Medicare FFS beneficiaries. Commenters stated that reporting on Medicare patients will help ACOs bridge to all payer reporting and that the policy will encourage more ACOs to participate in the Shared Savings Program and transition into accountable care. Commenters also stated that the policy will help expand the number of beneficiaries in accountable care and support CMS' strategic direction. Another commenter shared that Medicare CQMs will ensure a more direct comparison between populations than the all-payer eCQM and will mitigate complications related to payer mix. Another commenter noted that reporting specific to Medicare beneficiaries is the most appropriate measure of ACO quality performance. One commenter stated that limiting reporting to Medicare patients, versus all payer data, will be an important step towards reducing burden for providers in ACOs and encouraging specialist participation. Another commenter shared that CQMs for the Medicare FFS patients with a treatment relationship to ACO professionals with a primary care or related specialty ensures that CMS receives meaningful quality information on the ACO's influence on the Medicare FFS population.

A few commenters agreed that Medicare CQMs would address most of ACOs' concerns regarding all payer/all patient reporting, such as difficulties reporting for those ACOs with a higher proportion of specialty practices or groups with multiple EHRs, beneficiaries with no primary care relationship, and shouldering a greater burden when matching and deduplicating patient records. Other commenters noted Medicare CQMs reduce concerns about specialists reporting on primary care focused measures. Commenters shared that Medicare CQMs were responsive to several key concerns raised by ACOs regarding feasibility of implementing eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, including equity concerns.

One commenter agreed that Medicare CQMs would serve as an intermediary step to help ACOs build the infrastructure, skills, knowledge, and expertise required to report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. A few commenters stated that Medicare CQMs will provide a learning period and additional time to address barriers in reporting eCQMs.

A few commenters noted that Medicare CQMs will ease the concern with the state of readiness of reporting on eCQMs and reduce administrative burden and cost relative to an all-payer reporting requirement. One commenter stated that the transition away from the Web Interface reporting has created a large resource burden on ACOs to develop new processes, hire vendors, and manage frequently changing requirements, and additional support and flexibility will allow ACOs to meet these requirements and promote digital quality measurement reporting rather than creating additional costs and unnecessary burden.

One commenter stated that Medicare CQMs are far better matched to ACOs' reporting capabilities than all-payer eCQMs, which would otherwise be required if this proposal is not finalized. Another commenter noted that ACOs with participants on multiple EHR systems may still be challenged when gathering and aggregating data to report, but the option to report using Medicare CQMs should provide ACOs with adequate opportunities to overcome this challenge and prepare them to report all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs.

Response: We appreciate commenters' recognition of the role that Medicare CQMs could have in advancing digital quality measurement, supporting ACOs in developing processes to gather and aggregate data for care coordination and quality improvement, and bridging the gap to all payer quality measurement.

Comment: Several commenters expressed concern about the implementation of Medicare CQMs beginning in performance year 2024. A few commenters stated that ACOs will most likely need more time to implement these changes than allotted in this proposal. One commenter stated that we should limit reporting to the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs provided by CMS in the initial performance year of Medicare CQMs to ensure greater uptake by ACOs given the complexity and time it will take to identify patients. One commenter suggested delaying the implementation of Medicare CQMs until performance year 2027 if reporting is not limited.

Response: We acknowledge concerns about the implementation of Medicare CQMs. Implementing Medicare CQMs in performance year 2024 is appropriate as Medicare CQMs are an optional collection type. Medicare CQMs are intended to support ACOs in transitioning to all payer/all patient measures and to address concerns about the feasibility of reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs that requires aggregating and deduplicating an even larger volume of patient data, which would otherwise have been required starting in 2025. We recognize that Medicare CQMs might not be the suitable collection type for some ACOs. In performance year 2024, ACOs would have the option to report quality data utilizing the CMS Web Interface measures, eCQMs, and/or MIPS CQMs collection types. Under our proposal, in performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, ACOs would have the option to report quality data utilizing the eCQMs, MIPS CQMs, and/or Medicare CQMs collection types. We encourage ACOs to evaluate all quality reporting options to determine which collection type is most appropriate based on the ACO's unique composition and technical infrastructure.

In response to comments which suggest limiting reporting, as discussed later in this section of the final rule, we are modifying our proposal to provide a quarterly list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs which will provide ACOs with more frequent cumulative list of beneficiaries eligible for the measure to facilitate population-based activities related to improving health through quality measurement and to aid ACOs in the process of patient matching and data aggregation necessary for reporting quality measures.

Comment: One commenter applauded us for our willingness to assist ACOs that might be struggling to operationalize payer-agnostic reporting solutions but disagreed with Medicare CQMs being unilaterally offered to only Shared Savings Program ACOs and not to organizations that may struggle with the exact same reporting barriers on the MIPS reporting side. The commenter questioned why the Medicare CQM reporting option was not also made available in the form of a (modified) eCQM and noted that there are organizations participating in either the Shared Savings Program or MIPS who report via eCQMs that may face the same barriers of multiple EHR systems and/or high proportions of specialty practices that we have cited as an impetus for the proposal of Medicare CQMs.

Response: We refer the reader to past MIPS rules, where CMS has consistently stated that it would use all-payer measures in MIPS where possible to create a more comprehensive picture of the practice performance (81 FR 77098). Alongside that goal, we also stated that we aim to simplify reporting and reduce administrative burden (81 FR 77098). ACOs face unique challenges in matching patients and aggregating their data for quality measures. These challenges are not commonly shared by MIPS eligible clinicians. Further, we did not propose to establish a Medicare eCQM because of the complexity and potential technical burden ACOs and their vendors would face in implementing eCQMs for a Medicare-only population. As discussed in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52420), we proposed Medicare CQMs in light of concerns raised by ACOs and other interested parties and our commitment to supporting ACOs in the transition to digital quality measure reporting. Medicare CQMs would serve as a transition collection type to help some ACOs build the infrastructure, skills, knowledge, and expertise necessary to report all payer/all patient MIPS CQMs and eCQMs by defining a population of beneficiaries that exist within the all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications and tethering that population to claims encounters with ACO professionals with specialties used in assignment. Specifically, Medicare CQMs would address the concern raised by ACOs that for ACOs with a higher proportion of specialty practices the broader all payer/all patient eligible population would capture beneficiaries with no primary care relationship to the ACO. Further, given ACOs are commonly made up of multiple practices using multiple EHRs, ACOs would be able to utilize Medicare Parts A and B claims data to help identify the ACO's eligible population and to validate the ACO's patient matching and deduplication efforts. For these reasons, it is appropriate to establish Medicare CQMs as a new collection type for Shared Savings Program ACOs only.

Comment: Many commenters raised questions and concerns regarding how CMS will determine the appropriate Medicare CQM population for these measures. Some commenters noted that the proposed denominator eligibility criteria are similar to but differ in timeline from the current assignment methodology and that this creates unnecessary complexity, potentially leading to confusion in identifying the appropriate Medicare ACO population. A few commenters suggested we combine the new Medicare CQM assignment methodology with the existing assignment methodology, which would mitigate potential challenges and ensure a smoother implementation process. A few commenters recommended that CMS limit the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs to beneficiaries that are attributed to the ACO. One commenter stated that depending on an ACO's selected assignment methodology, they may not be fully aware of their full assignable population and that we should limit reporting under Medicare CQMs to the ACO's assigned population rather than the assignable. Several commenters asked that we clarify if the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs is limited to assigned beneficiaries or if it includes all assignable beneficiaries eligible for the measure. A few commenters suggested using the existing ACO population base to create less confusion.

Response: In response to commenters' suggestions that we align the definition of beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQM with our assignment methodology, we note that our proposal aims to align Medicare CQMs with the all payer/all patient measure specifications because Medicare CQMs are intended to support ACOs in the transition to all payer/all patient measures. For reasons previously mentioned, our proposal would limit Medicare CQM reporting to beneficiaries that had an encounter with an ACO professional with a specialty used in assignment or who were voluntarily assigned to the ACO. Our proposed approach balances our commitment to the transition to all payer/all patient measures and the need to provide additional support to some ACOs as they build the skills and infrastructure necessary to report digital quality measures.

In addition, the term “attributed” means that the patient had the plurality of their care with the ACO. The definition of a beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQM does not require that a patient had the plurality of their care with the ACO and, as such, the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs is broader than the ACO's attributed population.

Comment: One commenter recommended that we limit the list to Medicare patients who have an encounter with a physician with a specialty utilized in step 1 of attribution under the current assignment methodology. A commenter stated that the proposal limits quality reporting to Medicare patients with a primary care visit instead of all patients with any type of visit.

Response: As discussed in the June 2015 final rule, primary care services can generally be defined based on the type of service provided, the type of provider specialty that provides the service, or both (80 FR 32748). The list of provider specialties used in assignment was based on public comments and recommendations by CMS medical officers knowledgeable about the services typically performed by physicians and non-physician practitioners (80 FR 32750). In finalizing the list of specialties used in assignment, we attempted to limit the list of physician specialty types that would be excluded from the assignment process to those physician specialties that would very rarely, if ever, provide primary care to beneficiaries (80 FR 32750). Tethering the Medicare CQM population to claims encounters with ACO professionals with specialties used in assignment limits the ACO's quality reporting to patients with a care relationship with the ACO and is responsive to feedback from ACOs and other interested parties.

Further, our proposed definition for a beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs does not require a primary care visit in order to create alignment with the all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications. The HCPCS and revenue center codes designated under § 425.400(c) as primary care services for purposes of assignment under the Shared Savings Program only partially over-lap with the codes designated as eligible encounters used to identify the eligible population in all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications. Applying primary care service codes or deferring to the basic assignment methodology under subpart E to identify the beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs would have the unintended result of limiting the codes used to identify eligible encounters in the Medicare CQM Specification to only the codes that overlap with primary care services.

Medicare CQMs are an all beneficiary Medicare measure (not just ACO assigned beneficiaries) and is designed to help ACOs address challenges with aggregating patient data required to report Medicare CQMs and the all payer/all patient MIPS CQMs and eCQMs in the future.

Comment: One commenter asked how the assignable Medicare population reporting requirements will apply to ACOs that have elected prospective versus retrospective assignment.

Response: Our proposed definition for beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQM is the same for ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation and ACOs under prospective assignment. In a manner that is identical to the all payer/all patient MIPS CQM Specifications, the Medicare CQM Specifications would identify the measurement period applicable to each measure along with the beneficiary encounters for inclusion in the measure regardless of the ACO's assignment election.

Comment: One commenter requested that CMS provide further technical specifications on the eligibility of beneficiaries who meet the CQM requirement, the process for identifying these beneficiaries within EMRs/Vendor systems, and the impacts of FQHC/RHC in quality score as these entities would not traditionally be included in MIPS. This commenter added that this will allow ACOs to better determine next steps for moving away from the Web Interface reporting, while allowing better stewardship of resources to do this work.

Response: As stated in our proposal, ACOs that include or are composed solely of FQHCs or RHCs must report quality data on behalf of the FQHCs or RHCs that participate in the ACO (88 FR 52422). To clarify, while FQHCs and RHCs that provide services that are billed exclusively under FQHC or RHC payment methodologies are exempt from reporting traditional MIPS, FQHCs and RHCs that participate in APMs, such as the Shared Savings Program, are considered APM Entity groups described at § 414.1370 (88 FR 52422). It may be helpful to note that the three quality measures (for example, eCQMs, MIPS CQMs, Medicare CQMs) included in the APP measure set for PY 2024 overlap with measures that health centers report via the Uniform Data System (UDS). This experience reporting quality measures may be helpful for health centers that participate in the Shared Savings Program as they transition to the APP measure set.

Further, we will provide technical guidance and specifications to ACOs to support ACOs in the identification of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs. Specifically, parameters for the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs will be included along with the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs in the ACO's Quarterly Informational Report Packages.

Comment: A few commenters were concerned that ACOs reporting Medicare CQMs would need to collect data from specialist practices that do not care for any Shared Savings Program attributed patients.

Response: Medicare CQMs include beneficiaries who had at least one claim with a date of service during the measurement period from an ACO professional who is a primary care physician, who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c), or who is a PA, NP, or CNS or is assigned to the ACO through voluntary alignment (88 FR 52421). We note that in the proposed definition of beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs under § 425.20, we incorrectly used the phrase “certified nurse specialist” (88 FR 52754). In this final rule, we are finalizing our proposed definition of beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs under § 425.20, with a modification for clarity, and to ensure consistency of terminology across provisions, to reference “clinical nurse specialist” instead of “certified nurse specialist.”

We recognize the care delivered to beneficiaries by a range of clinicians. ACOs that include specialists included in the Medicare CQM definition would need to collect data from those specialists in order to submit true, accurate, and complete data when reporting Medicare CQMs. ACOs and other interested parties can access the list of specialty designations used in assignment in Table 9 of the “Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications.” This document is updated annually and can be access on the Shared Savings Program website at https://www.cms.gov/medicare/payment/fee-for-service-providers/shared-savings-program-ssp-acos/guidance-regulations . As discussed elsewhere in this section of the final rule, we will provide ACOs with a list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs that can be used by ACOs in identifying encounters with specialists that should be included in quality measure reporting and improvement.

Comment: Several commenters had concerns related to data aggregation and deduplication when submitting Medicare CQMs. One commenter stated that, because the eligible population for Medicare CQMs would be broader than the ACO assigned population, many ACOs must still hire data aggregation vendors. A few commenters noted that most ACOs will require significant process workflow and software development if targeting only Medicare beneficiary data. A few commenters stated that ACOs face an initial reporting burden of collecting data from member practices on disparate EMRs and that this burden exists regardless of the scale of data collected. Commenters stated that Medicare CQMs do not resolve underlying challenges with electronic quality measurement and require significant manual data aggregation and patient matching across many tax identification numbers (TINs) and electronic health records (EHRs) types. One commenter stated that eliminating the all payer/all patient approach is helpful for large ACOs with multiple participants and EHR systems, but that the Medicare CQM option is still complex and requires data aggregation, patient matching and deduplication.

Response: We acknowledge commenters concerns related to data aggregation and deduplication when submitting Medicare CQMs and recognize ACOs will have to develop these capabilities to aggregate and exchange data either in-house or through vendors but that the movement toward digital quality data will help further enhance ACOs' care coordination and quality improvement capabilities. As discussed elsewhere in this section of the final rule, we will provide ACOs with a list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs to support ACOs in the aggregation and deduplication of patient data.

In our proposal, we recognized that that Medicare CQMs may not be the suitable collection type for some ACOs (88 FR 52420). We encourage ACOs to evaluate all quality reporting options to determine which collection type is most appropriate based on the ACO's unique composition and technical infrastructure. In addition to our proposal to report quality data utilizing the Medicare CQMs collection type, in performance year 2024, ACOs would have the option to report quality data utilizing the CMS Web Interface measures, eCQMs, and/or MIPS CQMs.

To support ACOs in the transition to digital quality measures, in December 2022, we hosted a webinar to support ACOs in the transition to reporting all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and released a guidance document on the topic. Specifically, the webinar focused on the APP, guidance and resources for reporting via the APP, and questions and answers from ACOs and their vendors. Resources from the “Reporting MIPS CQMs and eCQMs in the APM Performance Pathway” webinar are available at https://youtu.be/LDrpoGnnRQs and https://qpp.cms.gov/resources/webinars . The guidance document, entitled “Medicare Shared Savings Program: Reporting MIPS CQMs and eCQMs in the Alternative Payment Model Performance Pathway (APP)” is available in the Quality Payment Program Resource Library at https://qpp-cm-prod-content.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/2179/APP%20Guidance%20Document%20for%20ACOs.pdf . The guidance describes how ACOs should identify an appropriate combination of data variables to achieve consistent and replicable patient matching that provides the most complete and accurate data to meet the measure specification and valid and reliable measure performance. The guidance highlights these common variables that ACOs have used to achieve patient matching rates of 90 percent or higher, which is sufficient for quality reporting, and goes on to indicate that ACOs should use 100 percent of this matched, deduplicated population to determine the eligible population for each measure.

Comment: Some commenters noted that the Medicare CQM proposal does not advance digital quality measurement as it leaves the eCQM reporting option unchanged, while one commenter noted that that Medicare CQMs do not advance digital quality measurement because CQMs do not use CEHRT. A commenter urged CMS to focus on addressing the existing gaps in digital infrastructure and equity—a prerequisite to advancing digital measurement—and to continue working with the Office of the National Coordinator for Health IT (ONC) to advance consensus-based standards for digital quality measurement and interoperability.

Another commenter stated that Medicare CQMs will not inherently advance their capabilities to report on eCQMs such as the adoption of CEHRT across ACO participants, processes to enable aggregation of quality measurement data across all ACO participants, the ability to assess data completeness and efficiently calculate quality measures outcomes or the generation of QRDA-III files. Another commenter advocated for CMS to identify an alternative pathway to transmit data in a standardized way to enable successful patient matching, such as use of a national patient identifier or revisions to QRDA I formats. One commenter stated that incorporating additional demographics in the data (QRDA I or FHIR) may improve patient matching and support deduplication and suggested that CMS consider introducing extra demographic criteria in their CMS Implementation Guide or QRDA I specifications to enhance patient matching accuracy.

Response: Medicare CQMs would help ACOs build the infrastructure, skills, knowledge, and expertise necessary to aggregate patient data consistent with our goals described in our Digital Quality Measurement (dQM) Strategic Roadmap, which can be accessed at https://ecqi.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/CMSdQMStrategicRoadmap_032822.pdf . Improving data aggregation skills will support ACOs in their adoption of all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and the transition to dQMs.

As discussed in Domain Three: Optimize Data Aggregation of the dQM Strategic Roadmap, data aggregators currently play a vital role in the acquisition, processing, transmission, analysis, and application of digital health information. Aggregation of digital data is critical for measures that depend on information from multiple providers or sources. However, a solution that requires CMS to serve as the only data aggregator is neither cost effective nor desirable for our goals for accountable care. We recognize that providers and care settings are at different stages of readiness to adopt dQMs and that the timeframe for transition to dQMs across different quality reporting programs varies. As stated in our dQM Strategic Roadmap, we anticipate the transition may be paced with the uptake of FHIR API technology.

In response to suggestions regarding QRDA I or other file formats, QRDA I is based on the Health Level Seven International® (HL7®) Clinical Document Architecture (CDA) and does include demographic specifications. However, we note we did not propose QRDA I for Medicare CQMs and, further, that implementation guide updates are beyond the scope of our proposal. As described elsewhere in this section of the final rule, to support ACOs in the aggregation and deduplication of patient data, we will provide ACOs with a quarterly list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQM.

Comment: One commenter stated that Medicare CQMs will still require creating a QRDA file, which increases the administrative burden and cost for ACOs.

Response: Medicare CQMs conform to the measure specifications included on MIPS CQMs, not eCQMs. Thus, there is no data type designation determination requiring QRDA. We anticipate providing technical guidance to ACOs and their vendors to support successful adoption of Medicare CQM reporting in accordance with the use of multiple data submission types as permitted under the MIPS data submission standards.

Comment: A couple commenters requested clarification as to whether a third party intermediary is required to submit Medicare CQMs if an ACO has multiple electronic health record systems, or if an ACO can collect, match, and de-duplicate their own data if they have the expertise.

Response: Medicare CQMs may be submitted by the ACO or a third party intermediary. Medicare CQMs would be subject to the data submission requirements detailed at § 414.1325 which provide, “[e]xcept for the Medicare Part B claims submission type, the data may also be submitted on behalf of the individual MIPS eligible clinician or group by a third party intermediary described at § 414.1400.”

Comment: We received several comments in support of our proposal to provide ACOs a list of beneficiaries who are eligible for Medicare CQMs within the ACO. However, many commenters stated that it will add significant burden for ACOs to ensure that the list is complete, and that we should limit reporting of Medicare CQMs to the list of beneficiaries provided by CMS. One commenter stated ACOs will struggle to comprehensively identify the patient population for which they must report Medicare CQMs. Another commenter noted that ACOs operating under prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation may not have the data necessary to determine their assignable populations. Several commenters suggested that limiting the reporting of Medicare CQMs to the patients provided on the CMS-issued list at the beginning of the reporting period would reduce the burden associated with reporting significantly and make the option a more feasible one for 2024. One commenter asked how ACOs could use the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs with incomplete claims data at the start of the reporting year. The commenter stated that CMS should ensure that the population is clear and knowable to ACOs during the reporting period.

One commenter noted that sharing data once annually may lead to missing data points and may compromise data completeness, while another commenter expressed that the proposal creates confusion, and CMS would not be able to provide timely beneficiary information to ACOs for reporting purposes. One commenter suggested that we limit reporting requirements to beneficiaries that are aligned at both the beginning and the end of the performance period, while another commenter recommended that calculations be performed on the back end of the reporting trail by CMS and that the list is automatically furnished biannually. Other commenters suggested that CMS should establish the set of beneficiaries for which ACOs report Medicare CQMs based on third quarter roster file it provides to ACOs and the beneficiaries that have a claim in the last quarter and reduce burden by adding additional demographic data elements. The commenter requested that we work with interested parties to come up with a process to ensure ACOs know/can report on their eligible patients.

Response: We acknowledge the concerns and challenges raised by commenters regarding ACOs needing to ensure that the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs is complete. To support ACOs in reporting Medicare CQMs, we are modifying our proposal to provide ACOs with a list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs once annually, at the beginning of the quality data submission period. Instead, we will provide each ACO with a list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs each quarter throughout the performance year as part of the ACO's Quarterly Informational Reports Packages in order to give ACOs access to the full 12 months of encounters necessary to report Medicare CQMs. The list will be cumulative and updated quarterly to reflect the most recent quarter's data. For example, encounters with dates of service January 1st through March 31st of the performance year will be included in the first quarter list. First quarter report packages are typically delivered to ACOs in May of the performance year. The second quarter list will include encounters with dates of service January 1st through June 30th of the performance year. Second quarter report packages are typically delivered to ACOs in August of the performance year. The third quarter list will include encounters with dates of service January 1st through September 30th of the performance year. Third quarter report packages are typically delivered to ACOs in November of the performance year. Lastly, the fourth quarter list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs will include encounters with dates of service January 1st through December 31st of the performance year. Fourth quarter report packages are typically delivered to ACOs in February of the year following the performance year. The Quarterly Informational Reports Packages are delivered to ACOs via the data hub in the ACO Management System (ACO-MS). This list will reduce burden relative to the proposed annual list by giving ACOs a complete list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs. The fourth quarter list will allow ACOs to verify that they have accounted for all beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs.

The cadence of updating the list throughout the performance year will enable ACOs to aggregate data throughout the performance year. ACOs may use the fourth quarter list to ensure that all beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs are captured in the ACOs' reporting. Sharing data throughout the performance year will allow ACOs to prepare the majority of their submission data in advance of the submission period and then use the fourth quarter list to ensure that all beneficiaries that are eligible for Medicare CQMs are captured in the ACOs' reporting.

Additionally, the quarterly list will reduce reporting burden relative to the proposed annual list by including beneficiary-level age, diagnosis, encounter, and exclusion flags on the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs to aid ACOs in identifying the denominator eligible population for each measure to the extent that such data can be identified through claims and Medicare administrative systems. It is important to note that these flags are meant to assist ACOs in the aggregation of data and do not replace the need for ACOs to evaluate their patient population against each Medicare CQM Specification prior to submission, including confirming the beneficiaries meet the denominator criteria for the measure. In a manner identical to MIPS CQM Specifications, the Medicare CQM Specifications will allow for the use of multiple sources of data (for example, multiple EHRs, paper records, registries, patient management systems) to compile a measure's numerator and denominator. ACOs should use all available data, including the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs provided by CMS, to ensure that the ACO's quality data is true, accurate, and complete.

Comment: Several commenters had concerns about the timing of the claims run-out that would be used to determine the complete list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs. A commenter shared that it would be helpful for CMS to define what is considered the recommended time to allow for claims run out for the patient list to be considered completed and to identify on the list patients that have been “excluded” from the reporting denominator. One commenter suggested that we extend the reporting window such that ACOs will have full 90-day claims run out for Medicare CQM data; for example, move the reporting deadline from March 31 to at least April 30, providing this can be done without delaying ACO financial reconciliations. The commenter added that ACOs should have confidence they can access the full and accurate list of patients whose data is used in quality measurement. One commenter asked if we considered a claims run-out period prior to the submission window for Medicare CQMs to ensure that the ACO can determine the appropriate and accurate measure population prior to calculation and submission.

A few commenters noted that the proposal's focus on claims during the measurement period could lead to discrepancies due to claims reporting delays of up to a year.

Response: We clarify our use of the phrase “run-out” at 88 FR 52422 of our proposal. We intended to use the phrase “run-out” to indicate that the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs that we proposed to share prior to the start of the quality data submission period would not include a full 12-months of encounter data. Medicare CQM Specifications would be identical to MIPS CQM Specifications. As such, ACOs would be able to utilize multiple sources of information (for example, multiple EHRs, paper records, registries, patient management systems) to aggregate Medicare CQM performance data. ACOs would not be limited to the use of claims data to report Medicare CQMs. While ACOs would be required to report on a full 12-months of performance data for Medicare CQMs, unlike Part B claims measures, no claims run-out would be required to report Medicare CQMs.

Comment: One commenter recommended that we apply the incentive to report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs to Medicare CQMs. The commenter noted that we should reward maximum savings to ACOs that achieve the quality performance standard.

Response: As stated in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52423), we did not propose to add Medicare CQMs to the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive described at § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ) for performance year 2024. The incentive is for all payer/all patient eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting. Since Medicare CQMs would include only Medicare FFS beneficiaries, Medicare CQMs are not a form of all payer/all patient reporting. As such, they are not included in the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive. We note that the alternative quality performance standard, which we finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (88 FR 69831), would be applicable to ACOs that report Medicare CQMs when those ACOs are otherwise eligible for scaled savings/losses.

Comment: Several commenters opposed the Medicare CQM proposal. One commenter stated that creating an ACO-specific measure specification creates additional burden on both practices and health care vendors (that is, EHR vendors, registry vendors, and health care IT vendors) to maintain the same measure based off multiple specifications. The commenter added that the measure benchmark will not be the same across the different collection types, leading to confusion and non-comparable results. Another commenter concluded that reporting Medicare CQMs would require a third-party vendor resulting in an increased reporting expense because their current vendor does not support CQM.

Another commenter shared that they do not believe that introduction of new types of quality measures advances the goals of the Quality Payment Program and will likely lead to confusion among clinicians and administrative staff working on the program since Medicare CQMs are only available to Shared Savings Program ACOs and should not be categorized the same as MIPS CQMs/eCQMs available to all MIPS-eligible clinicians.

Another commenter opposed the proposal and stated that we are moving backwards by allowing ACOs to report on assigned and “assignable” Medicare beneficiaries. The commenter stated that ACOs should be required to report all payer data. This commenter stated they believe that the proposal will devalue the utility of publicly reported information and fall short of providing useful information to consumers about ACOs. They added that the proposal would create another point of disparity between MIPS, MVPs, and the Shared Savings Program: making fair comparisons across each impossible. The commenter questioned whether the proposal would meet the standard established section 1899(b)(3)(C) of the Act which states that, the Secretary shall establish quality performance standards to assess the quality of care furnished by ACOs and seek to improve the quality of care furnished by ACOs over time by specifying higher standards, new measures, or both for purposes of assessing such quality of care as it would seem that limiting the ACO's reporting to only Medicare Patients is lowering the standards not “specifying higher standards.”

Response: We acknowledge commenters concerns regarding the creation of the Medicare CQM Specifications and direct readers to this section of this final rule for discussion on this topic. A measure specification for the Medicare CQMs collection type must be established in order for such collection type to have its own benchmark separate from the other collections, for example, MIPS CQMs collection type or eCQMs collection type. We direct readers to our discussion of benchmarks in this section of the final rule to address concerns related to Medicare CQM benchmarking. Lastly, we direct readers to the discussion in this section of the final rule where we clarify that third-party intermediaries are permitted, but not required for reporting Medicare CQMs.

As discussed in our proposal, our long-term goal continues to be to support ACOs in the adoption of all payer/all patient measures (88 FR 52421). The Shared Savings Program has historically permitted an ACO to report on a sample of attributed Medicare beneficiaries through the CMS Web Interface. While we have encouraged and incentivized ACOs to transition to the reporting of all payer data for MIPS CQMs and/or eCQMs, many have commented on the complexity of doing so due to their difficulty matching and aggregating patient data across the various EHR systems used by their constituent clinician practices (88 FR 52420). We previously extended the availability of the CMS Web Interface in the Shared Savings Program to provide relief for these practices (86 FR 65262). Medicare CQMs provide a transition path for ACOs that have difficulty reporting patient data by limiting the beneficiaries for which an ACO must match and aggregate data to only Medicare beneficiaries that are eligible to be included. This is the logical next step in the reporting of digital quality measures as it is inclusive of the ACO's broader Medicare FFS population, which is larger than the sample currently used in the CMS Web Interface, but not as large as the all payer/all patient population that must be reported for an eCQM or MIPS CQM.

Comment: Many commenters suggested that we establish Medicare CQMs as a permanent option that is in place until digital quality measurement and reporting is feasible for all ACOs. Commenters outlined several benefits for making Medicare CQMs permanent, including reducing the ACOs need to choose, invest in, and implement multiple reporting types prior to digital quality measurement and reporting options becoming available, and that while the requirements for reporting are challenging, Medicare CQMs will still be an improvement over the other reporting options currently available. Another commenter noted that their EHR vendor does not plan to support Medicare CQMS because it is a temporary reporting option not in alignment with or contributing to the adoption of eCQMs. One commenter stated that understanding the timeline for sunsetting Medicare CQMs will help ACOs take the necessary steps to prepare for eCQM reporting and make decisions about continued participation in the program.

Another commenter urged CMS to maintain the Medicare CQM reporting option for ACOs until digital quality measurement and reporting is feasible for all ACO participants, especially small and independent providers who will need more technical assistance, resources, and support during this transition. Many commenters stated that Medicare CQMs should be a permanent collection types due to issues transitioning to all payer/all patient measures.

Response: We have heard that ACOs need a better understanding of how long Medicare CQMs will be an available collection type as they prepare to report quality measures for future performance years. Medicare CQMs are intended to serve as a transition to all payer/all patient reporting and not as a permanent collection type. We acknowledge that ACOs are at different stages of readiness to adopt all payer/all patient measures and we intend for Medicare CQMs to be available to ACOs during their transition to all patient/all payer reporting. We expect that the sunsetting of the Medicare CQM collection type may be paced with the uptake of FHIR API technology, but this will be assessed on industry readiness and CMS requirements.

Comment: Many commenters suggested that we to consider a data completeness requirement lower than 75 percent for ACOs reporting eCQMs, MIPS CQMs, or Medicare CQMs due to the complexities of multiple practices and EHRs involved in a single ACO, and the significant burden and investment required by ACOs and participant providers to be able to complete any one of these reporting options.

One commenter suggested that we apply the same data completeness thresholds utilized for MIPS CQMs and Medicare CQMs to eCQMs and recommended that data completeness thresholds be applied at the ACO-level. A few commenters recommended that we maintain a 75 percent data completeness requirement for ACO quality measure reporting. The commenter stated that CMS should require ACOs to report on 100 percent of their assigned beneficiaries only and that this would be consistent with other payers' quality reporting methodology and allows all quality measures to utilize a uniform denominator set, while another few commenters expressed concern about the impact of potentially requiring 100 percent data completeness for any of the measure types in the future.

One commenter noted that it is unclear which data completeness standard the agency proposes to adopt, and that the proposal mentions both establishing data completeness at 75 percent for the CY 2024, CY 2025, and CY 2026 performance periods, as well as 100 percent data completeness in terms of aggregating, matching, and de-duplicating data. One commenter stated that our methodology and baseline for determining data completeness is unclear, so ACOs and others lack insight into whether they are submitting appropriately complete data.

Response: The data completeness criteria threshold of at least 75 percent for the Medicare CQMs aligns with the data completeness criteria threshold established for eCQM and MIPS CQM collection types for the CY 2024, CY 2025, and CY 2026 performance periods/2026, 2027, and 2028 MIPS payment years as discussed in section IV.A.4.f.(1)(d) of this final rule. It is appropriate for Medicare CQMs, eCQMs, and MIPS CQMs to have the same data completeness criteria in order to prevent confusion and complexity and to maintain a level of consistency in the program. Additionally, CMS will provide all ACOs with a list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs each quarter, which will aid ACOs in satisfying data completeness by enabling ACOs to aggregate data throughout the performance year and use the fourth quarter list to ensure that all beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs are captured in the ACOs' reporting.

To meet the data completeness criteria, ACOs must report quality performance data (“Performance Met,” “Performance Not Met,” or denomination exclusions/exceptions) for at least 75 percent of the eligible and matched denominator population for the performance year. In our proposal, we stated that, “The ACO's aggregated ACO submission must account for 100 percent of the eligible and matched patient population across all ACO participants” (88 FR 52422). By this we mean that ACOs must aggregate quality performance data from all of their ACO participants. Once patient data are matched and de-duplicated across all of the ACO's participants, the ACO would then match the aggregated patient data with each Medicare CQM Specification to identify the eligible population for each measure. To aid ACOs in meeting data completeness, CMS will provide each ACO with a list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs each quarter in order to give ACOs access to the full 12 months of encounters necessary to report Medicare CQMs.

In response to commenters suggestion that CMS should require ACOs to report on 100 percent of their assigned beneficiaries, we direct readers to the discussion in this section of the final rule regarding the alignment of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs and the all payer/all patient measure specification.

Comment: Many commenters expressed concern regarding our larger goal to require all ACOs to report all payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. Many commenters noted concerns that the current state of data standards and interoperability will not yet fully enable ACOs to meet the eCQM reporting requirements successfully.

Some commenters supported the transition to eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting. One commenter shared their belief that reporting eCQMs is a better reflection of overall quality, while another commenter encouraged CMS to continue working with providers to facilitate the transition to all payer/all patient measures even as/if the provider or ACO chooses to report Medicare CQMs.

Response: We did not propose any changes to the previously finalized policies regarding all payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. We note that the Medicare CQM collection type that we are finalizing in this rule addresses many of concerns about all payer/all patient shared by ACOs and other interested parties. Specifically, because beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs must have had a claim encounter with an ACO professional with a specialty used in assignment, Medicare CQMs would address the concern raised by ACOs that for ACOs with a higher proportion of specialty practices and/or multiple EHR systems, the broader all payer/all patient eligible population would capture beneficiaries with no primary care relationship to the ACO. Further, ACOs, particularly ACOs with a higher proportion of specialty practices and/or multiple EHRs, would be able utilize Medicare Part A and B claims data to help identify the ACO's eligible population and to validate the ACO's patient matching and deduplication efforts. For these reasons it is appropriate to establish Medicare CQMs as a new collection type for Shared Savings Program ACOs.

After consideration of the public comments received, we are finalizing our proposal to define a beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs at § 425.20. As discussed elsewhere in this section of the final rule, we are finalizing our proposed definition of beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs under § 425.20, with a modification for clarity, and to ensure consistency of terminology across provisions, to reference “clinical nurse specialist” instead of “certified nurse specialist.” Specifically, we are finalizing the definition of a beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs at § 425.20 as a beneficiary identified for purposes of reporting Medicare CQMs for ACOs participating in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Medicare CQMs) who is either of the following:

• A Medicare FFS beneficiary (as defined at § 425.20) who—

++ Meets the criteria for a beneficiary to be assigned to an ACO described at § 425.401(a); and

++ Had at least one claim with a date of service during the measurement period from an ACO professional who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c), or who is a physician assistant, nurse practitioner, or clinical nurse specialist.

• A Medicare FFS beneficiary who is assigned to an ACO in accordance with § 425.402(e) because the beneficiary designated an ACO professional participating in an ACO as responsible for coordinating their overall care.

Additionally, we are finalizing our proposal with modifications to reflect that the list of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs will be shared more than once annually to add new paragraph (c)(1)(iii) to § 425.702 as follows:

For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, CMS, upon the ACO's request for the data for purposes of population-based activities relating to improving health or reducing growth in health care costs, protocol development, case management, and care coordination, provides the ACO with information about its FFS population.

• The following information is made available to ACOs regarding beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20:

++ Beneficiary name.

++ Date of birth.

++ Beneficiary identifier.

++ Sex.

• Information in the following categories, which represents the minimum data necessary for ACOs to conduct health care operations work, is made available to ACOs regarding beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20:

++ Demographic data such as enrollment status.

++ Health status information such as risk profile and chronic condition subgroup.

++ Utilization rates of Medicare services such as the use of evaluation and management, hospital, emergency, and post-acute services, including the dates and place of service.

As discussed in section IV.A.4.e of this final rule, we are finalizing our proposal to establish Medicare CQMs for Accountable Care Organizations Participating in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Medicare CQMs) as a new collection type for Shared Savings Program ACOs reporting on the Medicare CQMs (reporting quality data on beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20) within the APP measure set and administering the CAHPS for MIPS Survey as required under the APP.

As discussed in section IV.A.4.f.(1)(d) of this final rule, we are not finalizing the proposal to establish the data completeness criteria threshold of at least 80 percent for the CY 2027 performance period/2029 MIPS payment year.

(3) Benchmarking Policy for Medicare CQMs

As the Shared Savings Program adopted the APP (see, for example, § 425.512(a)(3)(i)), benchmarks for quality measures used by the program are those established under the MIPS policies at § 414.1380(b)(1)(ii). We proposed that new benchmarks for scoring ACOs on the Medicare CQMs under MIPS would be developed in alignment with MIPS benchmarking policies (88 FR 52423). As historical Medicare CQM data would not be available at the time of the proposal, we proposed for performance year 2024 and 2025 to score Medicare CQMs using performance period benchmarks. Similarly, as quality performance data are submitted via Medicare CQM and baseline period data become available to establish historical benchmarks, we proposed for performance year 2026 and for subsequent performance years to transition to using historical benchmarks for Medicare CQMs when baseline period data are available to establish historical benchmarks in a manner that is consistent with the MIPS benchmarking policies at § 414.1380(b)(1)(ii).

The following is a summary of the comments we received on these proposals and our responses.

Comment: A few commenters supported CMS' proposal to use performance period benchmarks for performance years 2024 and 2025 before transitioning to historical benchmarks starting with performance year 2026.

Response: We thank the commenters for their support.

Comment: Several commenters were concerned about the proposal to score Medicare CQMs in performance years 2024 and 2025 using performance period benchmarks. One commenter stated that the use of same year percentile rankings is in direct conflict with CMS' stated desire to have all Traditional Medicare beneficiaries in accountable relationships by 2030 as in-year percentile calculations would result in a percent of participants to fail. The commenter also noted that the use of a historical period would create the opportunity for improvement. Another commenter stated that ACOs need Medicare CQM benchmarks to understand the impact of reporting Medicare CQMs compared to CMS Web Interface. A few commenters stated that benchmarks should be established prior to the start of the performance year and that having unknown benchmarks will discourage ACOs from reporting Medicare CQMs. One commenter added that benchmarks should be based on historical performance on which everyone can improve.

Response: As discussed in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52423), we proposed that new benchmarks for scoring ACOs on the Medicare CQMs under MIPS would be developed in alignment with MIPS benchmarking policies. Since Medicare CQMs would be subject to MIPS scoring policies, the application of MIPS benchmarking policies to Medicare CQMs is both logical and necessary for implementation of the new collection type. MIPS benchmarks are specific to each collection type (for example, eCQM, MIPS CQM, Medicare CQM, CMS Web Interface, Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) for MIPS Survey measures, and Part B claims measures). Because benchmarks are specific to collection type, a measure reported as an eCQM will be compared to a different benchmark than the same measure reported as a MIPS CQM or Medicare CQM.

In response to commenters concerns regarding the use of performance period benchmarks, as described in the MIPS Quality Benchmark Overview which is updated for each performance year and posted in the Quality Payment Program Resource Library, if a quality measure or collection type does not have a historical benchmark, we will attempt to calculate benchmarks based on data submitted for the performance period. The PY 2023 MIPS Quality Benchmark Overview can be accessed at https://qpp-cm-prod-content.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/2272/2023%20Quality%20Benchmarks.zip . We can establish performance period benchmarks when at least 20 instances of the measure are reported through the same collection type and meet data completeness and case minimum requirements and have a performance rate greater than 0% (or less than 100% for inverse measures). Consistent with MIPS benchmarking policies, since historical data would not be available for the Medicare CQM collection type in the first and second year of implementation, we proposed for performance years 2024 and 2025 to score Medicare CQMs using performance period benchmarks. In further alignment with MIPS benchmarking policies, we proposed for performance year 2026 and subsequent performance years to transition using historical benchmarks for Medicare CQMs when baseline period data are available to establish historical benchmarks in a manner that is consistent with the MIPS benchmarking policies at § 414.1380(b)(1)(ii). Benchmarks for the Medicare CQMs will be updated annually and posted on the Quality Payment Program Resource Library at https://qpp.cms.gov/resources/resource-library.

Comment: Several commenters expressed concerns about the use of MIPS benchmarking policies to establish benchmarks for Medicare CQMs. Commenters stated that the use of 20 entities reporting at least 20 patients was not a reliable basis for benchmarks, and benchmarks would vary year-to-year based on changes in the number of entities reporting. A few commenters stated that, on review of the existing benchmarking process for MIPS CQMs, eCQMs, and now Medicare CQMs, they do not believe that the process for distributing performance across deciles is transparent nor does this approach as constructed produce information that is meaningful. The commenters stated that the approach also assumes that all measures should be scored with the potential to achieve 100% (or 0% if it is an inverse measure) and may not reflect clinical knowledge or practical considerations of quality. A few commenters stated that CMS needs to revise the benchmark methodology to increase transparency, consider the impact of random fluctuation, and adjust for practical considerations of comparison and relative performance. One commenter noted that ACOs have virtually no opportunity to improve scores based on data due to the current benchmarks and data lags. One commenter was concerned that that some ACOs could receive zero points or at most seven points.

Response: The MIPS benchmarking requirement of 20 submissions of at least 20 cases was established in the CY 2017 Quality Payment Program final rule as the minimum standard for establishing a benchmark to reliably score measures (81 FR 77277). In order for a benchmark to be established for the Medicare CQMs collection type, there would need to be a minimum of 20 Shared Savings Program ACOs with at least 20 cases reporting the measure and such submissions would need to meet the data completeness criteria requirement and have a performance rate greater than zero in order for a reliable benchmark to be established (42 CFR 414.1380(b)(1)(ii)(A)). For the CY 2024 performance period, benchmarks have not yet been established for the Medicare CQMs collection type since CY 2024 will be the first year in which such collection type will be available and as a result, performance period benchmarks will be established for the Medicare CQMs collection type if the benchmarking requirement of 20 submissions of at least 20 cases is met (§ 414.1380(b)(1)(ii)). With the number of Shared Savings Program ACOs reporting under the APP in order to meet the Shared Savings Program's quality performance standard, there is little variation in the volume of Shared Savings Program ACOs reporting data. As a result, we do not expect the establishment of reliable benchmarks for Medicare CQMs to be an issue.

To ensure that we establish robust benchmarks, each benchmark must have a minimum of 20 submissions that meet the data completeness requirement and meet the required case minimum criteria (20 cases) for scoring (§ 414.1380(b)(1)(ii)(A)). The benchmarking methodology relies on assigning points based on decile distributions with decimals. A decile distribution requires at least 10 observations. We doubled the requirement to 20 to be able to assign decimal point values and minimize cliffs between deciles (81 FR 77277). We establish benchmarks using a percentile distribution, separated into deciles, because it translates measure-specific score distributions into a uniform distribution of those reporting the measure based on actual performance values. For each set of benchmarks, we calculate the decile breaks for measure performance and assign points for a measure based on which benchmark decile range the clinician's measure performance rate is between (81 FR 77286). For the quality performance category measures, we use the case minimum requirements for the quality measures used in the 2018 Value Modifier (VM) program (see § 414.1265): 20 cases for all quality measures (81 FR 77287). We referred readers to Table 46 of the CY 2016 PFS final rule (80 FR 71282), which summarized the analysis of the reliability of certain claims-based measures used for the 2016 VM payment adjustment. The benchmarking policy and decile scoring system allow the program to score clinicians on quality performance in the program relative to care as it is provided in actual clinical settings by scoring according to data submitted through participants. This allows us to drive improvements in clinical care that is more considerate of real-world practice and responsive to changes over time.

Comment: A few commenters suggested that we apply the MIPS scoring rules for new measures which establish a 7-point scoring floor, provided data completeness requirements are met, and a 5-point floor in year two. Commenters noted that, during this 2-year phase, ACOs would be better able/willing to allocate limited resources to technical development and workflows associated with the transition. Stratifying Medicare only data without a “point floor” guarantee, according to commenters, may result in ACOs choosing to simply submit all payer data versus Medicare only data as it will be a lighter lift. In addition, committing to performance against unknown benchmarks for this new collection type, ACOs would have no way to gauge near real-time performance which has been a staple of the program.

Response: We note that the scoring policy providing measure achievement points of a 7-point scoring floor and a 5-point scoring floor pertains to the submission of new MIPS quality measures during their first 2 years in MIPS. Specifically, under the scoring policy for new MIPS quality measures in § 414.1380(b)(1)(i)(C), the measure achievement points available for the submission of a new MIPS quality measure (having a benchmark, and meeting case minimum and data completeness requirements) in its first year of MIPS are between 7 and 10 measure achievement points and the submission of a new MIPS quality measure (having a benchmark, and meeting case minimum and data completeness requirements) in its second year of MIPS are between 5 and 10 measure achievement points. The scoring policy for new MIPS quality measures is not applicable to the establishment of a new collection type or the application of a newly available collection type to an existing MIPS quality measure. In the CY 2022 PFS final rule, we noted that such policy will not apply to measures that have existed as a MIPS quality measure but are being introduced for a new collection type (86 FR 65500). For example, if a MIPS quality measure is currently available as a MIPS CQM and it becomes newly available as an eCQM or Medicare CQM, the application of the newly available collection type to an existing MIPS quality measure would not be considered a new measure under such scoring policy.

To operationalize the implementation of the Medicare CQMs collection type, specifically the capability to distinguish between the submission of data for a Medicare CQM and a MIPS CQM to CMS, we created an identifier that reflects the Quality number associated with a quality measure (that is, Q001, Q134, and Q236) followed by the letters “SSP.” For the reporting of Medicare CQMs, the identifiers are as follows: 001SSP, 134SSP, and 236SSP. We note that the Medicare CQM identifiers must be included in the submission files. We will take these comments into consideration for future rulemaking.

In response to the comment that ACOs would have no way to gauge near real-time performance which has been a staple of the program, we note that Medicare CQMs would transition to historical benchmarks when sufficient base period data are available to establish historical benchmarks in a manner that is consistent with MIPS benchmarking policies. We also direct readers to the discussion in section III.G.2.e. of this final rule regarding our finalized policy to adopt a historical 40th percentile quality performance standard for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. In section III.G.2.e of this final rule, we are finalizing, as proposed, the proposal to provide ACOs with the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score that would be used as the quality performance standard for a given performance year prior by the start of the performance year, which supports the ability for ACOs to understand and meet quality goals, allocate resources effectively, and ultimately support patients and improve quality outcomes. Lastly, as described at § 425.512(a)(4)(ii) and (5)(ii), in performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2023, ACOs that achieve a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and are otherwise eligible to share in savings would share in savings on a sliding scale (87 FR 69832). This alternative quality performance standard will help to mitigate impacts on shared savings and losses as ACOs transition to a new collection type.

Comment: Several commenters asked how benchmarks would be developed if fewer than 20 ACOs report Medicare CQMs.

Response: In the unlikely event that fewer than 20 instances of a Medicare CQM are reported that meet the data completeness and case minimum requirements, the MIPS scoring policy for measures that lack a benchmark would apply to that Medicare CQM. See § 414.1380(b)(1)(i)(A).

Comment: Since the Medicare CQMs would be available only to Shared Savings Program ACOs, a few commenters were concerned about ACOs being compared only to other ACOs that report Medicare CQMs. One commenter stated their preference to have their quality performance compared to all other participants on these measures. Another commenter stated that CMS should stop measuring ACOs against each other and instead measure ACOs on a national standard so that all ACOs can pass and do not lose out on savings due to arbitrary quality decile cut points.

Response: Given that benchmarks are specific to each collection type and that we proposed to establish Medicare CQMs as a new collection type for only Shared Savings Program ACOs, only ACO data will be available to benchmark Medicare CQMs. Additionally, the health equity adjustment would be applicable to Medicare CQMs for purposes of determining shared saving payments/losses. The application of the health equity adjustment would help improve performance when ACOs deliver high quality care to underserved patient populations. For these reasons, it is appropriate to establish benchmarks for Medicare CQMs that are consistent with MIPS benchmarking policies. ACOs that prefer to be compared to clinicians at large may do so by reporting eCQMs or MIPS CQMs, for which CMS calculates a benchmark using data reported by MIPS eligible clinicians reporting under the chosen collection type.

Comment: Commenters suggested the following alternative recommendations regarding establishing benchmarks for Medicare CQMs: A1c control and blood pressure control measures be considered topped out measures and depression screening be considered pay-for-reporting until benchmarks can be set for Medicare CQMs; for performance years 2024 and 2025, use CMS Web Interface benchmarks or make Medicare CQM measures pay-for-reporting; consider a process similar to the recent benchmarking of the CMS Web Interface measures where benchmarks would be defined based on pre-determined distributions of performance and thresholds are not dependent on random fluctuations in performance or on the fact that a measure is new to the program.

Response: We thank commenters for their feedback. The Shared Savings Program sunset our pay for reporting policy in PY 2020, and MIPS scoring policies do not include pay for reporting. As such, we would not apply pay for reporting to Medicare CQMs.

To address commenters suggestion that we consider a process similar to benchmarking of CMS Web Interface measures, we wish to underscore that MIPS benchmarking policies establish benchmarks for CMS Web Interface using historical data. Performance on CMS Web Interface measures are based on a sample of the ACO's beneficiaries and ACOs that have performed high on CMS Web Interface measures. We anticipate that ACO performance may fluctuate as ACOs transition to new collection types, like Medicare CQMs. Once historical data are available for Medicare CQMs consistent with MIPS benchmarking policies, we proposed to transition to using historical benchmarks.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing our proposal to establish new benchmarks for scoring ACOs on the Medicare CQMs under MIPS in alignment with MIPS benchmarking policies. As historical Medicare CQM data would not be available, we are finalizing that for performance years 2024 and 2025, we will score Medicare CQMs using performance period benchmarks. We are also finalizing that, for performance year 2026 and subsequent performance years, when baseline period data are available to establish historical benchmarks in a manner that is consistent with the MIPS benchmarking policies at § 414.1380(b)(1)(ii), we will score Medicare CQMs using historical benchmarks.

(4) Expanding the Health Equity Adjustment to Medicare CQMs

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69838 through 69858), for performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years, we finalized a health equity adjustment to upwardly adjust the MIPS Quality performance score for ACOs that report eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, are high performing on quality, and serve a higher proportion of underserved beneficiaries. As we stated in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, the goals of the health equity adjustment include rewarding ACOs serving a high proportion of underserved beneficiaries and supporting ACOs with the transition to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs (87 FR 69841).

Consistent with the goal of supporting ACOs in their transition to all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, we proposed that ACOs that report Medicare CQMs would be eligible for the health equity adjustment to their quality performance category score when calculating shared savings payments (88 FR 52423). We proposed to revise § 425.512(b) to specify that, for performance years 2024 and subsequent performance years, we would calculate a health equity adjusted quality performance score for an ACO that reports the three Medicare CQMs or a combination of eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for each measure, and administers the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B)). This proposal would advance equity within the Shared Savings Program by supporting ACOs that deliver high quality care and serve a high proportion of underserved individuals. Applying the health equity adjustment to an ACO's quality performance category score when reporting Medicare CQMs would encourage ACOs to treat underserved populations.

The following is a summary of the comments we received on these proposals and our responses.

Comment: We received several comments in support of our proposal to expand the health equity adjustment to Medicare CQMs. One commenter stated that the adjustment is necessary to correct the unintended consequence of disincentivizing the care of underserved populations in value-based payment systems. Another commenter noted the importance of a health equity adjustment in recognition of ACOs serving a high proportion of underserved beneficiaries who have traditionally lacked access to care or non-clinical resources that significantly impact their health.

One commenter supported our focus on health equity but stated these changes and financial implications are occurring too rapidly and urged a delay of at least one year. The commenter was concerned that the proposed calculation may not account for all components of health equity and noted the need for more funding and time for analysis and development. Another commenter supported our proposal, but they did not believe that a health equity adjustment is sufficient to address the underlying discrepancies in all-payer/all-patient measurement across vastly different patient populations. Another ACO concluded that it is unfair to compare a multispecialty group against other groups that either do not have specialists or have carved their specialists out of their ACOs, and that a more viable solution would be to require primary care services to have been provided to patients before they are eligible for eCQM reporting for measures that are intended to track performance of primary care.

One commenter was opposed to our proposal to expand the health equity adjustment to Medicare CQMs and questioned the legality of providing financial incentives to ACOs (providers) to provide more services to people of certain races, sexualities, and religions.

Response: In response to the commenter that alluded to providing financial incentives to ACOs (providers) to provide more services to people of certain races, sexualities, and religions, our proposal to expand the health equity adjustment to Medicare CQMs does not incentivize ACOs, ACO providers/suppliers, or ACO professionals to provide more services to individuals based on race, sexuality, religion, or any other protected class. By applying the health equity adjustment to ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score when determining shared savings and shared losses for ACOs, ACOs are rewarded for delivering high quality care and serving a high proportion of underserved individuals. Here, the proportion of underserved beneficiaries is determined using the Area Deprivation Index, enrollment in the Medicare Part D low-income subsidy, and dual eligibility for Medicare and Medicaid (42 CFR 425.512(b)(2)(iv)(A)). For a fuller discussion of how we found these factors to represent a method for determining the proportion of underserved beneficiaries, please see the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69838 through 69842). This approach is agnostic of race, gender, sexuality, and religion. As stated in Executive Order 13985, “Executive Order on Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government,” by advancing equity across the Federal Government, we can create opportunities for the improvement of communities that have been historically underserved, which benefits everyone. Extending the health equity adjustment to Medicare CQMs is consistent with our goal of promoting health equity across the health care system.

To address commenter's concern that the proposed calculation may not account for all components of health equity and may need more funding and time for analysis and development, we note that the health equity adjustment is designed to upwardly adjust the ACO's quality performance score and will not financially penalize ACOs. The health equity adjustment promotes health equity in a value-based care program, while simultaneously avoiding the pitfalls of other pay-for-equity type approaches. This health equity adjustment will not risk adjusting away disparities (thereby masking them) and does not set lower quality standards for underserved populations—rather, this provision will reward those providers who provide excellent care for underserved populations. Furthermore, these bonus points represent the sole motivation for ACOs seeking to improve quality and health equity.

In response to commenters' suggestion that we require primary care services to have been provided to patients before they are eligible for eCQM reporting for measures that are intended to track performance of primary care, we direct readers to this section of the final rule where we discuss the alignment of beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs and the all payer/all patient Measure Specifications.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing our proposal that ACOs reporting Medicare CQMs will be eligible for the health equity adjustment to their quality performance category score when calculating shared savings payments. We are also finalizing our proposal to revise § 425.512(b) to specify that, for performance years 2024 and subsequent performance years, we will calculate a health equity adjusted quality performance score for an ACO that reports the three Medicare CQMs or a combination of eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for each measure, and administers the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B)).

(5) Summary of Final Policies

In Table 28 of this final rule, we summarize the changes to the regulation at § 425.512(a)(4) and (5) to reflect the changes we are finalizing to the quality reporting requirements and quality performance standard for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. Performance benchmarks for performance year 2024 used to determine the 10th, 30th, and 40th percentiles for purposes of evaluating the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive described at § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ) will be posted on the Quality Payment Program Resource Library website at https://qpp.cms.gov/resources/resource-library.

We direct readers to the MIPS measure benchmarking policies described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(ii) and to both the quality benchmark and performance period benchmark documentation posted on the Quality Payment Program Resource Library website at https://qpp.cms.gov/resources/resource-library for more details. Performance benchmarks differ by collection type (that is, eCQM, MIPS CQM, Medicare CQM (as finalized), CMS Web Interface) and are updated for each performance year.

c. APP Measure Set

(1) Background

We refer readers to Table 29, which lists the measures included in the final APP measure set that will be reported by Shared Savings Program ACOs for performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years. These are the same measures finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69862); however, we noted that the Collection Type for each measure has been updated. As finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69863), we included the measure type in Table 29 for each measure in the measure set to provide ACOs a list of the outcome measures for purposes of meeting the quality performance incentive for reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. This information is also relevant to the alternative quality performance standard under which ACOs that fail to meet the quality performance standard to qualify for the maximum sharing rate, but that achieve a quality performance score at the 10th percentile on 1 of the 4 outcome measures in the APP measure set, may be eligible to share in savings on a sliding scale (87 FR 69861). We noted inclusion of this information does not change any of the measures in the measure set.

(2) Revisions

The CMS Web Interface collection type under the APP includes 10 measures. We refer readers to Table Group E of Appendix 1 of this final rule for the proposed substantive changes to measure specifications for 9 out of 10 CMS Web Interface measures starting with performance year 2024. As proposed, the changes would update measures and align the CMS Web Interface measures with the practice workflows of the MIPS CQM collection type.

We received public comments on these proposals. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: We received a comment expressing appreciation for not making any significant changes to the APP measure set.

Response: We thank the commenter for their support.

We received many comments about issues that were not related to the proposals included in this section of the proposed rule. The issues were related to the clinical merits of adding the three Medicare CQMs to the APP measure set, the financial, administrative, resource, and technical burden of this policy on ACOs and healthcare vendors, and the scheduled sunsetting of the CMS Web Interface in PY 2024. We refer readers to section IV.A.4.e., Reporting the Medicare CQMs, of this final rule for the disposition of our proposal to add three Medicare CQMs to the APP measure set.

Additionally, we requested information on the APP measure set and the Universal Foundation within the Medicare CQM proposal (88 FR 52423). We thank the commenters for their feedback and will take the comments under consideration in future rule making, as we evaluate the impact of aligning the APP measure set with the Universal Foundation measures and existing Value in Primary Care MVP.

In the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84733), we finalized the following three all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs under the APP for performance year 2021 and subsequent performance years:

• Quality ID#: 001 Diabetes: Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) Poor Control;

• Quality ID#: 134 Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-Up Plan; and

• Quality ID#: 236 Controlling High Blood Pressure.

In section IV.A.4.e of this final rule, we are finalizing our proposal to add these measures as Medicare CQMs to the APP measure set for Shared Savings Program ACOs beginning with performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years.

d. Modifications to the Health Equity Adjustment Underserved Multiplier

(1) Background

Consistent with our goal of rewarding ACOs that include a higher proportion of underserved beneficiaries while delivering high quality care, we finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69836 through 69857) the application of a health equity adjustment that adds up to 10 bonus points to an ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score based on certain criteria. The health equity adjustment is applied to an ACO's MIPS quality performance category score when the ACO reports the three all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in performance year 2023 and, as proposed in section III.G.2.b.(4) of this final rule, the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs starting in performance year 2024. To qualify for the health equity adjustment, the ACO must also meet the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 and administer the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B)). The health equity adjustment is conditional on (1) high quality measure performance and (2) providing care for a proportion of underserved populations greater than or equal to a predetermined floor.

The goal of the health equity adjustment is to reward ACOs with high performance scores on quality measures and that serve a high proportion of underserved beneficiaries. Correspondingly, the health equity adjustment bonus points are calculated by multiplying the ACO's performance scaler by the ACO's underserved multiplier. An ACO's performance scaler is designed to identify top performance among ACOs reporting all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in performance year 2023 and, as proposed in section III.G.2.b.(4) of this final rule, eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs in performance year 2024. The performance scaler is an aggregated value across all eCQM/MIPS CQM measures and is determined based on if the ACO's measure performance was in the top, middle, or bottom third of ACO performance for that performance year. We refer readers to section III.G.4.b.(7).(c) of the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69843 through 69845) for more details on the performance scaler calculation.

The underserved multiplier is designed to identify ACOs serving high proportions of underserved beneficiaries. As described in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69845 through 69849), the underserved multiplier is a proportion, ranging from zero to one, of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for the performance year that is considered underserved based on the highest of: (1) the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an Area Deprivation Index (ADI) national percentile rank of at least 85; or (2) the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries who are enrolled in Medicare Part D low-income subsidy (LIS) or are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. The use of both the ADI and Medicare and Medicaid dual eligibility or LIS status to assess underserved populations in the health equity adjustment allows CMS to consider both broader neighborhood level characteristics and individual characteristics among CMS beneficiaries.

The CY 2023 PFS final rule did not state how CMS intended to compute the proportion of beneficiaries with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85 with respect to beneficiaries for whom a numeric national percentile rank value is not available. We do not believe it is appropriate to assign a zero to the beneficiaries without an ADI national percentile rank in the calculation. Doing so would unfairly disadvantage ACOs with such beneficiaries vis-à-vis those ACOs with beneficiaries that all have an ADI national percentile rank by lowering their scores. The CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69846) stated that the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85 is computed using the number of assigned beneficiaries. A footnote stated that in computing the proportion of beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, we would use for each beneficiary the fraction of the year (referred to as person years) in which they were eligible for the aged/dual eligible enrollment type or for which they were eligible for the ESRD or disabled enrollment type and dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. In response to public comment, we finalized the proposal to include LIS as a modification to the calculation of the underserved multiplier (87 FR 69849). In calculating the LIS proportion, CMS uses the same methodology it adopted for calculating dually eligible beneficiaries: person years.

(2) Revisions

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52429 through 52430), we proposed to revise the underserved multiplier calculation to specify the calculations in more detail and bring greater consistency between the calculation of the proportion of ACOs' assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85 and the proportion of ACOs' assigned beneficiaries who are enrolled in Medicare Part D LIS or are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. Specifically, we proposed to remove beneficiaries who do not have a numeric national percentile rank available for ADI from the health equity adjustment calculation for performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years. Beneficiaries without a national percentile ADI rank would appear neither in the numerator nor in the denominator of the proportion.

While we established a policy for the treatment of aligned beneficiaries for whom an ADI national percentile rank could not reasonably be calculated for use in the AIPs risk factors-based score (87 FR 69796 through 69797), we neither proposed nor finalized a policy for such beneficiaries with respect to the calculation of the health equity adjustment underserved multiplier—nor do we believe the policy we finalized for AIP is appropriate for calculating the health equity adjustment. In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69800), we finalized the use of imputing a value of 50 for the ADI national percentile rank if there is insufficient data to match a beneficiary to an ADI national percentile rank for calculating AIP risk factors-based scores. There are important differences in the implications of using an imputed value of 50 for calculating the AIP risk factors-based scores and for calculating the underserved multiplier. The imputed ADI ranking of 50 corresponds to the average national ADI ranking and would be the most neutral imputed value and would avoid biasing an ACO's payments in either direction for risk factor-based scores in the AIP calculation. The use of an ADI ranking of 50 in the underserved multiplier, however, would result in that beneficiary not counting in the numerator of the underserved multiplier proportion because only beneficiaries with an ADI of at least 85 are counted in the numerator. Therefore, we proposed to exclude beneficiaries without a national percentile ADI rank from the health equity adjustment underserved multiplier (88 FR 52429). This approach is more equitable because it will remove a beneficiary without an ADI rank from the denominator and the numerator of the calculation of an ACO's underserved multiplier instead of penalizing ACOs that have such beneficiaries.

It is in the public interest to apply this change starting with performance period 2023. Section 1871(e)(1)(A)(ii) of the Act authorizes the Secretary to retroactively apply a substantive change in Medicare regulations if the Secretary determines that failure to apply the change retroactively would be contrary to the public interest. Here, applying this change starting with performance period 2023 is in the public interest because, absent further specification of how to treat beneficiaries without a national percentile ADI rank current policy may unfairly penalize ACOs for reasons beyond their control. Current policy counts beneficiaries with missing ADI ranks in the underserved multiplier denominator and contributes zero to the numerator, thereby reducing the health equity adjustment for ACOs with such beneficiaries and harming their ability to meet the quality performance standard and receive shared savings.

Separately, in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52430), we proposed to modify the calculation of the proportion of assigned beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid and the calculation of the proportion of assigned beneficiaries enrolled in LIS to use the number of beneficiaries rather than person years for calculating the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries who are enrolled in LIS or who are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid starting in performance year 2024. For example, when calculating the underserved multiplier component of the health equity adjustment to an ACO's quality performance score for ACOs that report the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, the proportion would be equal to the number of assigned beneficiaries with any months enrolled in LIS or dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid divided by total number of assigned beneficiaries. We did not propose to alter the calculation of the proportion of beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85, which is already based on the number of assigned beneficiaries. Person years would continue to be used in financial calculations where beneficiary experience is stratified by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, and aged non/dual eligible) and where it is important to account for partial year enrollment to ensure accuracy. This policy change will bring greater consistency between the two proportions used in determining the underserved multiplier. It also acknowledges that beneficiaries with partial year as compared to full year LIS enrollment or dual eligibility are also socioeconomically vulnerable and strengthens incentives for ACOs to serve this population. Further, inclusion of beneficiaries with partial year LIS enrollment in the underserved multiplier provides increased incentive for ACOs to help facilitate LIS enrollment for beneficiaries who meet eligibility criteria.

We received public comments on these proposals. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: Most commenters supported our proposed modifications to the health equity adjustment underserved multiplier. Several commenters expressed their appreciation for CMS's continued focus on health equity and providing access and accountable care to underserved patients. Other commenters stated that the health equity adjustment encourages providers to continue providing high quality care to underserved beneficiaries. One commenter stated that the modifications to the underserved multiplier would improve efficacy and consistency in identifying ACOs' underserved populations.

Response: We appreciate the comments in support of the proposed modifications to the health equity adjustment underserved multiplier. As we discussed in the proposed rule, the goal of the health equity adjustment is to reward ACOs with high performance scores on quality measures and that serve a high proportion of underserved beneficiaries. We agree with the commenters that these modifications will specify the calculations in more detail and bring greater consistency between the calculation of the proportion of ACOs' assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85 and the proportion of ACOs' assigned beneficiaries who are enrolled in Medicare Part D LIS or are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

Comment: Several commenters expressed concern that the national ADI rank score is inadequate in identifying underserved beneficiaries living in high cost-of-living areas. Commenters' concerns with the national ADI rank score included that it overly relies on income and home values, can mask urban poverty, and may not be a good proxy for patient-level social risk factors. One commenter gave the example that all the District of Columbia has a National ADI less than the 85th percentile. Another commenter stated that an ACO in San Francisco or Seattle will be disadvantaged by any index that uses rent and mortgage expenses to calculate a score but does not account for the large population of unhoused individuals. Two commenters recommended to remove the ADI from the health equity adjustment underserved multiplier calculation because it is weighted toward income and home values. One commenter recommended exploring other data sources as they become available for revisions to the underserved multiplier. Other commenters recommended incorporating a regional approach to identifying underserve beneficiaries such as including or replacing the National ADI rank score with State ADI rank scores in the underserved multiplier calculation. Two commenters noted that CMS Innovation models, including the ACO Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (REACH) and the Making Care Primary models, have announced inclusion of the State ADI rank score in their health equity adjustments for upcoming performance years.

Response: We did not propose any changes to the previously finalized policy of using the national ADI rank score in the health equity adjustment underserved multiplier; rather, we proposed to exclude beneficiaries without a national percentile ADI rank from the health equity adjustment underserved multiplier. Therefore, these comments are considered to be out of scope. However, we are continuing to assess the impact of using the national ADI in the health equity adjustment in the Shared Savings Program and the use of state ADI in the health equity adjustments used in CMS innovation models. Additionally, we note that for the purposes of the underserved multiplier, we use the “greater of” the percentage of individuals who are dually eligible or receiving low-income subsidies, or live in an area with an ADI of 85 or above. This means that for areas with lower average ADIs, if the ACO still serves a low-income population with a higher percentage of individuals who are dually eligible or receiving low-income subsidies, the ACO could still qualify for an upwards adjustment. CMS will continue to examine the learnings from the CMS Innovation Models and external researchers to contemplate improvements to the measures of geographic deprivation over time. We may consider these and other suggestions in future rulemaking.

Comment: Several commenters requested CMS to consider allowing all ACOs to be eligible for the health equity adjustment regardless of quality measure collection type. Specifically, commenters requested that ACOs reporting via the CMS Web Interface be eligible for the health equity adjustment.

Response: We direct commenters to our response to similar comments regarding the eCQMs/MIPS CQMs reporting requirement for health equity adjustment eligibility in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69841 through 69842). Specifically, we explained that while we understand the concerns raised by commenters regarding the eCQMs/MIPS CQMs reporting criteria for being eligible to receive a health equity adjustment, the health equity adjustment is designed to upwardly adjust the ACO's quality performance score and will not financially penalize ACOs that are not eligible for the adjustment such as those that do not report using eCQMs/MIPS CQMs. We further explained that as the transition to reporting all-payer eCQMs/MIPS CQMs continues, with this reporting mechanism becoming mandatory starting in PY 2025, the health equity adjustment would reinforce the timeline while supporting ACOs that may be experiencing challenges with the new quality reporting requirement and providing an incentive for ACOs not to seek to avoid underserved populations during the transition to reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs.

Comment: One commenter requested that CMS monitor the impact of the proposed change of dropping beneficiaries without a National ADI rank score to ensure it does not negatively affect rural ACOs already struggling to succeed in the Shared Savings Program.

Response: We acknowledge the commenter's concern. As we stated in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69841), the inclusion of National ADI, Medicare and Medicaid eligibility, and LIS status in the underserved multiplier calculation provides opportunity for identifying underserved populations for all providers, whether in rural or urban areas. Further, as we noted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69796) in a preliminary review of Medicare beneficiary information, less than 2 percent of Medicare beneficiaries could not be matched to a census block group due to missing or insufficient mailing address data, and approximately 1 percent of Medicare beneficiaries had sufficient address data but were in a U.S. census block group without a national percentile rank due to data suppression criteria. Based on the statistical analysis provided, we do not anticipate a significant impact of the proposed change on ACOs in rural areas. We will assess the impacts of the policy in rural areas and may make refinements as needed in future rulemaking.

Comment: One commenter requested CMS clarify what is being identified as health equity in the context of performance, as well as what is being measured.

Response: We refer readers to CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65382 through 65384) for a detailed explanation of health care outcome inequities and health equity. In the CY 2022 PFS final rule, we used the definition of health equity established in Executive Order 13985, issued on January 25, 2021, as “the consistent and systematic fair, just, and impartial treatment of all individuals, including individuals who belong to underserved communities who have been denied such treatment, such as Black, Latino, and Indigenous and Native American persons, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders and other persons of color; members of religious minorities; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) persons; persons with disabilities; persons who live in rural areas; and persons otherwise adversely affected by persistent poverty or inequality.” In response to the question of what is being measured, we direct readers to section III.G.4.b.(7)(d) of the CY 2023 PFS final rule (86 FR 69845 through 69849) where we finalized the inputs for the calculation of the underserved multiplier. Specifically, we state that we use the higher value of either the proportion of an ACO's assigned beneficiary population that is considered underserved based on beneficiaries who are from underserved neighborhoods, identified using ADI data, or the proportion of an ACO's assigned beneficiary population that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid or enrolled in Medicare Part D Low-Income Subsidy (LIS).

Comment: Some commenters requested CMS consider changes that were not related to the proposals included in this section of the proposed rule. The requests included: increase the health equity adjustment bonus points to have a greater and faster impact on the lives of the most at-risk beneficiaries; instead of using Medicare Part D LIS enrolled status in the underserved multiplier calculation, CMS should use Medicare Part D LIS eligible to account for those beneficiaries who have not enrolled, but whose income is lower than 150 percent of the federal poverty level; expand the number of diagnoses allowed on Medicare claims to accommodate the use of Z-codes or otherwise allow documentation of Z-codes in addition to the current limit of diagnosis codes on Medicare claims.

Response: We note that we did not propose any changes to these previously finalized policies in the proposed rule, and therefore, these comments are considered to be out of scope.

In conclusion, after review of the public comments received, we are finalizing at 42 CFR 425.512(b)(2)(iv)(A) our proposal to remove beneficiaries who do not have a numeric national percentile rank available for ADI from the health equity adjustment calculation for PY 2023 and subsequent performance years and to use the number of beneficiaries, rather than person years, for calculating the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries who are enrolled in LIS or who are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, starting in PY 2024.

e. Use of Historical Data To Establish the 40th Percentile MIPS Quality Performance Category Score

(1) Background

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69858), we finalized that beginning performance year 2024, one of the ways for an ACO to meet the Shared Savings Program quality performance standard and share in savings at the maximum rate under its track (or payment model within a track) is for the ACO to achieve a health equity adjusted quality performance score that is equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility based-scoring.

In the CY 2022 PFS proposed and final rules (86 FR 39274 and 86 FR 65271), we stated that, for a given performance year, the 30th or 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores would be calculated after MIPS final scoring is complete based on the distribution across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring. Therefore, we are not able to provide performance rate information prior to or during the performance year. Nevertheless, we stated that we believe that publicly displaying prior year performance scores that equate to the 30th and 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality performance category scores for the applicable performance year would still provide helpful information for ACOs to determine what level of quality performance they would need to meet in order to satisfy the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program. We stated that we would release this historical information on the Shared Savings Program website when it becomes available.

In the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39274), we also explained that interested parties have expressed concerns regarding the lack of information on the level of quality performance that would equate to the 30th or 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score and that would enable an ACO to be eligible to share in savings or to avoid maximum shared losses, if applicable. We noted that interested parties have expressed concern that these data are not publicly available prior to the start of a performance year and that they do not believe that ACOs have a way of determining what quality score they would need to achieve to meet the quality performance standard.

In the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39274), we also solicited comments on whether publicly displaying prior year performance scores that equate to the 30th or 40th MIPS Quality performance category scores would help to address ACOs' concerns regarding the lack of advance information regarding the quality performance score they must meet in order to satisfy the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program. Several commenters supported publicly displaying prior year performance scores that equate to the 30th or 40th percentile across all MIPS Quality category performance scores, and one commenter expressed concern that publicly displaying prior year performance scores is not the optimal way to address concerns of interested parties and indicated that performance is volatile and the 30th (or 40th) percentile may change significantly from year to year depending upon changes in quality performance in MIPS (86 FR 65271).

We clarified in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46148) and final rule (87 FR 69867) that we use the submission-level MIPS Quality performance category scores (unweighted distribution of scores) to determine the 30th percentile and 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores for purposes of establishing the applicable quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program. In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52430 and 52431), we stated that in light of public comments and concerns about the predictability of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score due to changes in MIPS scoring policies over time—including MIPS scoring changes impacting measures that lack a benchmark or case minimum as described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(i)(A), measure achievement points as described at paragraph (b)(1)(i), new measures (years 1 and 2 of a measure's use) as described at paragraph (b)(1)(i)(C), new sub-group reporting option as described at § 414.1318(a), and MIPS High Priority and End to End Bonus Points as described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(v)—and as a result of the concerns expressed by ACOs and other interested parties and as we gain experience with aligning Shared Savings Program reporting and scoring policies with MIPS, we believe that a revised methodology is needed to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score for the quality performance standard for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years.

Additionally, we stated in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52431) that as MIPS scoring policies evolve over time, changes in MIPS scoring policy have the potential to adjust the year-to-year comparability of MIPS Quality performance category scores. Between performance years 2022 and 2023, there were MIPS policy changes to measures that lack a benchmark or case minimum as described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(i)(A), measure achievement points as described at paragraph (b)(1)(i), new measures (years 1 and 2 of a measure's use) as described at paragraph (b)(1)(i)(C), and a new sub-group reporting option as described at § 414.1318(a). Additionally, MIPS High Priority and End to End Bonus Points were sunset in performance year 2022 as described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(v). The projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score for performance year 2023 does not reflect these proposed methodological changes. To minimize reliance on a single year of performance data, the use of multiple years of historical data could be used to “smooth” out the impact of MIPS scoring policy changes on the quality performance standard in any 1 year. At the same time, using too many years of data to average scores may include a greater number of years that do not reflect current policies.

(2) Revisions

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52431), we proposed to use historical submission-level MIPS Quality performance category scores to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. Specifically, we proposed to use a rolling 3-performance year average with a lag of 1-performance year (for example, the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2024 would be based on averaging the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores from performance years 2020 through 2022). We believe that our proposal to use a 3-year historical average is consistent with the proposal under section IV.A.4.h.(2) of the CY 2024 proposed rule that would permit, for purposes of establishing a performance threshold as identified in § 414.1405(b), a time span of up to 3 consecutive performance periods for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years.

We would provide ACOs with the performance score that equates to the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score that would be used as the quality performance standard for a given performance year prior to the start of the performance year (for example, the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score based on historical data and applicable for performance year 2024 would be released on the Shared Savings Program website in December 2023).

The use of 3 historical base years would mitigate issues that may arise from using a single year historical reference such as scoring, policy, and/or performance anomalies, such as a pandemic, specific to the historical base year. Additionally, the use of historical data would allow additional time for data availability and limit the potential impact of MIPS Targeted Review as described at § 414.1385 and other MIPS scoring corrections. This approach is also responsive to the concerns ACOs, and other interested parties have with the predictability of the current method of calculating the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score. However, we acknowledged that by using historical benchmarks, the benchmark would not reflect the most recent policies, measure specifications, and scores (88 FR 52431). For example, the historical base years are 2-4 years removed from the performance year and could reflect data that may have anomalies specific to the base year that would render those data inconsistent with the performance year's quality performance. Additionally, changes to measure specifications for measures included in the APP measure set may result in the historical base period including measures that are different than the corresponding measures that were applicable during the performance year. This could further reduce the comparability of historic base year data with the performance year's quality performance data.

Table 29 in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52432) shows the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores for performance years 2018 through 2021 based on the current methodology as published in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69868). The proposed methodology would be effective for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. We have added to Table 30 the projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores for performance years 2022 and 2023 based on the proposed methodology for illustrative purposes. The projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2022 is based on the average of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores from performance years 2018 through 2020, and the projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2023 is based on the average of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores from performance years 2019 through 2021. The years are averaged at equal weights. For example, we would calculate the projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2022 by first summing the 2018 (70.80), 2019 (70.82), and 2020 (75.59) 40th percentile Quality performance category score values to arrive at a value of 217.21 [70.80 + 70.82 + 75.59 = 217.21]. We would then divide the value of 217.21 by three (the number of years included in the historical reference period) to arrive at a projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score of 72.40 for 2022 [217.21 ÷ 3 = 72.40]. Note that this example illustrates averaging the 2018, 2019, and 2020 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score values.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52432), we solicited comments on our proposal to use a 3-performance year rolling average with a lag of 1-performance year to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. Using a 1-year lag would help ensure the availability of base period data by limiting the possibility that data availability is negatively impacted by scoring, policy, and/or performance anomalies from the prior performance year. In the development of our proposal to use a 3-performance year rolling average with a lag of 1-performance year to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, we considered another alternative methodology, which was to establish a historical quality performance standard based on the year immediately prior to the performance year's quality performance score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring (88 FR 52432). We also solicited comments on other alternative methodologies we should consider to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score for the quality performance standard.

The following is a summary of the comments we received on our proposal to use historical data to establish the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score and our responses.

Comment: Several commenters supported our proposal to use historical submission-level MIPS Quality performance category scores to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years and to provide ACOs with the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score that would be used as the quality performance standard for a given performance year prior to the start of the performance year. Several commenters noted that the proposal would provide ACOs with more certainty and predictability regarding what the quality targets are in advance of the performance period starting and mitigate the potential impact of annual program changes affecting the MIPS Quality performance category scores. A few commenters stated that basing the threshold on historical data will provide transparency around the threshold calculation. One commenter stated that the proposal would alleviate issues with scoring and performance anomalies as was seen during the COVID-19 pandemic and limit the impact of the MIPS Targeted Review and MIPS scoring corrections; however, the commenter noted using historical benchmarks will not reflect the most recent scores and measure specifications.

Response: We appreciate commenters' support and agree that providing ACOs with the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score that would be used as the quality performance standard for a given performance year prior by the start of the performance year supports ACOs' ability to understand and meet quality goals, allocate resources effectively, and ultimately support patients and improve quality outcomes.

Comment: A few commenters that supported the proposal also expressed concerns that data from performance years 2020 to 2022 are not likely to yield a meaningful comparison given the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policies applied in those years and suggested that CMS could consider a weighted average approach that gives more credit to the most recent year (that is, performance year 2022). Another commenter supportive of the proposal recommended that CMS assess whether a longer or potentially different lookback period would be more appropriate for performance year 2024, given that the lookback period for performance year 2024 will reflect years heavily impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Another commenter supportive of the proposal stated that implementation of the proposed methodology should be delayed until after the CMS Web Interface sunsets and transition to eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs reporting occurs. The commenter further stated that the rolling 3-year performance average with a lag of 1-performance year will eventually help solve for changes in scoring policies; however, in the first year that scores are based on eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, the historical submission-level MIPS Quality performance category score will be predominantly based on CMS Web Interface measures. Should CMS finalize the proposal, the commenter recommended CMS set guardrails during the transition period to ensure that ACOs transitioning to the eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs are not unfairly penalized against historical MIPS Quality performance standards that do not adequately consider historical eCQM/MIPS CQM/Medicare CQM submission data.

Response: The methodology we are finalizing provides a guardrail by minimizing the reliance on a single year of performance data that may have anomalies specific to the performance year, such as a pandemic, and by using multiple years of historical data to prevent a cliff and “smooth” out the impact of MIPS scoring policy changes on the quality performance standard in any one year. As explained in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, as MIPS scoring policies evolve over time, changes in MIPS scoring policy have the potential to adjust the year-to year comparability of MIPS Quality performance category scores (88 FR 52431).

Comment: One commenter opposed the proposal stating that it creates the potential for an unlevel playing field because the benchmark would not reflect the most recent policies, measure specifications, and scores as the base years used would be 2-4 years prior, and there may be significant anomalies making it more difficult to achieve that score years later. The commenter noted that in performance year 2025, when all organizations will be reporting using eCQMs, the historic percentiles, based largely on CMS Web Interface measures reported in performance years 2021 to 2023, would be more difficult to achieve with eCQM reporting. Additionally, the commenter stated that the playing field would not completely level out until performance year 2029 when all historic years used in the calculation require reporting via eCQMs, and only if there were no other significant changes to the measures and reporting requirements.

Response: In the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84720 through 84722), we aligned the Shared Savings Program quality reporting requirements with the APP and have worked over time to align with MIPS scoring policies (see 86 FR 65253 and 65254; 87 FR 69779 and 69780 for a summary of certain finalized policies); however, we acknowledged that MIPS scoring changes could occur that may impact the predictability of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score. We acknowledged in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52431) that by using historical benchmarks, the benchmark would not reflect the most recent policies, measure specifications, and scores.

As we stated in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52431), and some commenters agreed, the use of 3 historical base years would mitigate issues that may arise from using a single year historical reference such as scoring, policy, and/or performance anomalies, such as a pandemic, that are specific to the historical base year. Additionally, the use of historical data would allow additional time for data availability. While we understand concerns about the transition from the CMS Web Interface in performance year 2024 and the historical data changing over time with more ACOs increasingly submitting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs data, delaying the proposal to use a rolling 3-performance year average with a lag of 1-performance year to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score would result in a delay to mitigate potential MIPS scoring policy changes and a delay in providing ACOs with their benchmark target prior to the start of the performance year. For these reasons, the implementation of the proposed methodology should not be delayed until after the CMS Web Interface sunsets.

Additionally, the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score is not based solely on Shared Savings Program ACOs. Out of the 30,000-40,000 MIPS eligible clinicians and APM entities in the MIPS Quality performance category score unweighted distribution, less than 500 are ACOs. As stated in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69867), the unweighted distribution of Quality performance category scores is based on the Quality performance category scores of the submitting MIPS eligible clinicians and APM entities (for example, ACOs, other APM entities, group practices, and individual clinicians). For illustrative purposes, we are providing an example using the average (instead of the 30th or 40th percentile) for the quality performance standard. In this example, there are three submitting entities: an ACO, a MIPS eligible clinician that is a group practice, and an individual MIPS eligible clinician. The MIPS Quality performance category scores for these submitting entities are 90 for the ACO, 70 for the group practice, and 50 for the individual clinician. The average of the unweighted distribution of scores is (90 + 70 + 50)/3 = 70 where each submitting entity contributes one score. The weighted distribution of scores takes into account the number of individual providers from each submitting entity. The ACO has 10 providers, the MIPS Group has four providers, and the individual MIPS provider has one provider. The average of the weighted distribution is ((90 × 10) + (70 × 4) + (50 × 1))/15 = 82. Thus, by using a weighted distribution of scores when calculating the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score for the quality performance standard, each of the ACO's individual providers would be contributing to the calculation rather than the ACO itself, and the ACO's score would be counted once. As noted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69867 and 69868), we use the submission-level MIPS Quality performance category scores (unweighted distribution of scores) to determine the 30th percentile and 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores for purposes of establishing the applicable quality performance standard. The use of the unweighted distribution of scores aligns with the MIPS and Shared Savings Program benchmarking policies.

Furthermore, not all MIPS eligible clinicians and APM entities report the CMS Web Interface measures, and for performance years 2023 and 2024, the CMS Web Interface collection type is only available for APM Entities reporting the APM Performance Pathway, such as Shared Savings Program ACOs. Historical benchmark years are thus likely to reflect eCQM and MIPS CQM reporting more quickly than if they were based on Shared Savings Program ACOs alone, even as the CAHPS for MIPS Survey measure and the two administrative claims measures also contribute to an ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score.

Comment: One commenter noted that they supported an alternative methodology we considered during the development of our proposal, which was to establish a historical quality performance standard based on the year immediately prior to the performance year's quality performance score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores. They noted that the playing field would then be leveled in performance year 2026 under this methodology.

Response: We appreciate the commenter's response to our request for comment on alternative methodologies for consideration in calculating the historical submission-level MIPS Quality performance category score. Prior to the publication of the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, in addition to our proposed methodology, we evaluated two alternative methodologies for calculating a historical MIPS Quality performance category score: establishing the historical quality performance standard based on the year immediately prior to the performance year; and also based on a 2-performance year rolling average with a lag of 1-performance year. Of the methodologies we considered, the 3-year historical benchmark with a 1-year lag best accounts for the anticipated learning curve that ACOs may encounter as they transition to eCQM/MIPS CQM/Medicare CQM reporting. This methodology allows ACOs to know in advance what MIPS 40th percentile Quality performance category score they will need to achieve in order to meet the quality performance standard for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. With this predictability, ACOs can work to meet this target as they evaluate and develop strategies to continue to improve their quality performance for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years.

Comment: One commenter requested that CMS provide better scoring toolkits, methodologies, and sample scoring calculations to ACOs and QCDRs, similar to the MIPS scoring toolkits released annually, in advance of and during the performance period so that clear scoring predictions and calculations can support ACOs in improving their quality of care. A few commenters suggested that CMS provide prospective information on both the quality score that would qualify an ACO for savings and the methodology used to calculate the benchmarks.

Response: We thank the commenters for their feedback. We plan to provide updates to the APP Toolkit available at https://qpp.cms.gov/resource-library and other educational documents for ACOs to include Medicare CQM guidance and specifications and associated policies as close to the start of the performance as possible.

For information on how shared savings and shared losses are calculated, please refer to the Medicare Shared Savings Program Shared Savings and Losses and Assignment Methodology and Quality Performance Standard Specifications, available on the Shared Savings Program website under Program Guidance & Specifications (for example, in Version 11 (PDF, 1.9MB), refer to Section 4.3 Performance Year Financial Reconciliation Calculations). Version 11 is available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-2.

Comment: Several commenters requested that CMS publish MIPS Quality performance category scores in the Public Use Files (PUF) to bring greater transparency to the calculation of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score calculation.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' feedback. In the Medicare Shared Savings Program Performance Year Financial and Quality Results PUF, we provided several ACO-specific variables related to quality performance results including the ACO's quality score, an indicator whether the ACO met the quality performance standard, indicators for each of the three measure reporting options (that is, Web Interface, eCQM, MIPS CQM), and an indicator whether the ACO did not completely report quality for any of the reporting options. We may consider adding additional ACO-specific variables in future years. ACOs can review their measure-specific performance used to calculate their MIPS Quality performance category score along with their final MIPS Quality performance category score in their MIPS performance feedback report. ACOs are also required to publicly report their quality measure scores on their websites per § 425.308(b)(5). We also provide quality measure benchmarks for the current performance year on the Shared Savings Program website at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/sharedsavingsprogram/program-guidance-and-specifications.

Comment: One commenter requested that CMS publish the percentile performance thresholds for the individual quality measures prior to the performance year.

Response: For measures that have historical benchmarks, we generally publish them around the start of each performance year at https://www.cms.gov/medicare/payment/fee-for-service-providers/shared-savings-program-ssp-acos/guidance-regulations. Measures with performance period benchmarks—which include the administrative claims measures: Measure# 479 Hospital-Wide, 30-Day, All-Cause Unplanned Readmission (HWR) Rate for MIPS Groups and Measure# 484 Clinician and Clinician Group Risk-standardized Hospital Admission Rates for Patients with Multiple Chronic Conditions—are published after the submission period for the applicable performance year. Benchmark resources are published in the Quality Payment Program resource library and are updated for each performance year at https://qpp.cms.gov/resources/resource-library.

Comment: One commenter stated that if Medicare CQMs are established as proposed, there will not be any historical data for these measures. Therefore, the commenter requested that CMS clarify how the proposal to use a rolling 3-performance year average with a lag of 1 performance year will incorporate Medicare CQMs to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score.

Response: We acknowledge that Medicare CQM data will not be part of the performance year 2024 and 2025 historic reference periods, but the 2026 historic reference period will be inclusive of MIPS Quality performance category scores that are based on Medicare CQMs reported in performance year 2024. As finalized in section III.G.2.b of this final rule, performance year 2024 will be the first year that Medicare CQMs will be available for Shared Savings Program ACOs under the APP. As a result, historical Medicare CQM data will not be available at the time the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score is calculated for performance years 2024 and 2025; however, the historical data will be available at the time the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score is calculated for performance year 2026 (based on the average of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score from performance years 2022 through 2024). With the sunsetting of the CMS Web Interface at the end of performance year 2024 and as more ACOs transition to reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, the historic 3-year performance average of the MIPS Quality Performance Category Score will gradually incorporate additional Medicare CQM data in each subsequent performance year.

After consideration of the public comments, we are finalizing our proposal to use historical submission-level MIPS Quality performance category scores to calculate the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. Specifically, we will use a rolling 3-performance year average with a lag of 1-performance year (for example, the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2024 will be based on averaging the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores from performance years 2020 through 2022). We will provide ACOs with the performance score that equates to the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score that would be used as the quality performance standard for a given performance year prior to the start of the performance year (for example, the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score based on historical data and applicable for performance year 2024 would be released on the Shared Savings Program website in December 2023).

Table 30 shows the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores for performance years 2018 through 2021 based on the current methodology as published in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69868). The methodology we are finalizing in this final rule will be effective for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. We added the projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category scores for performance year 2022 based on the methodology we are finalizing for illustrative purposes to Table 30. We note that Table 30 is same as Table 29 that was included in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52432). Based on the actual 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score values in Table 30, we can provide, for illustrative purposes, the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score value for the quality performance standard for performance year 2024. We calculate the projected 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score used for the quality performance standard for performance year 2024 by first summing the 2020 (75.59), 2021 (77.83), and 2022 (77.73) 40th percentile Quality performance category score values to arrive at a value of 231.15 [75.59 + 77.83 + 77.73 = 231.15]. Note that performance year 2023 is skipped for the one-year lag. We then divide the value of 231.15 by three (the number of years included in the historical reference period) to arrive at a 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score value of 77.05 for performance year 2024 [231.15 ÷ 3 = 77.05].

f. Apply a Shared Savings Program Scoring Policy for Excluded APP Measures and APP Measures That Lack a Benchmark

(1) Background

In the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84720 through 84734), we finalized an approach that aligns the Shared Savings Program quality performance scoring methodology with the MIPS scoring methodology. We also stated that for each quality measure that an ACO submits that has significant changes, the total available measure achievement points are reduced by 10 points under the APP under current MIPS scoring policy (§ 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A)) (85 FR 84725)). In the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84901), we finalized policies at § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A) to provide that for each measure under MIPS that is submitted, if applicable, and impacted by significant changes, performance is based on data for 9 consecutive months of the applicable CY performance period. If such data are not available or may result in patient harm or misleading results, the measure is excluded from a MIPS eligible clinician's total measure achievement points and total available measure achievement points. We stated that “significant changes” means changes to a measure that are outside the control of the clinician and its agents and may result in patient harm or misleading results. Significant changes include, but are not limited to, changes to codes (such as ICD-10, CPT, or HCPCS codes), clinical guidelines, or measure specifications. As described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A), measures that are excluded due to significant changes are excluded from a MIPS eligible clinician's total measure achievement points and total available measure achievement points.

In performance year 2022, two of the eCQMs/MIPS CQMs that are part of the APP measure set were excluded from MIPS measure achievement points and total available measure achievement points for the MIPS Quality performance category under § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A). Specifically, the eCQM version of the Preventive Care and Screening: Screening for Depression and Follow-up Plan measure (Quality ID #134) and the Controlling High Blood Pressure measure (Quality ID #236) were excluded. Thus, under MIPS scoring policies, ACOs reporting one or both of these measures had their total measure achievement points and total available measure achievement points reduced by 10 (for reporting one measure) or 20 (for reporting both measures) points, respectively. Under the APP, these ACOs were still required to report all 6 measures; however, their performance year 2022 MIPS Quality performance category score was based on the 4 or 5 non-excluded measures (depending on whether the ACO reported one or both excluded measures) in the APP measure set. Consequently, the resulting MIPS Quality performance category score for an ACO that would have performed well on the excluded quality measures would be lower than it otherwise would have been if those measures were not excluded. Alternatively, if an ACO would have performed poorly on the excluded quality measures, then the resulting MIPS Quality performance category score would be higher than it otherwise would have been if those measures were not excluded. In either scenario, an ACO is required to report quality performance for all measures under the APP and has no control over whether and which measures are excluded.

(2) Revisions

Given that the Shared Savings Program does not determine which quality measures are excluded and that ACOs do not have a choice of measures they can report under the APP, we do not want to adversely impact shared savings determinations for events outside the ACOs' control, such as in the event a measure is excluded. Therefore, in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52432 and 52433), we proposed that, for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, if (1) an ACO reports all required measures under the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for all required measures and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1), and (2) the ACO's total available measure achievement points used to calculate the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score for the performance year is reduced due to measure exclusion under § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A), then we would use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, to determine whether the ACO meets the quality performance standard required to share in savings at the maximum rate under its track (or payment model within a track), for the relevant performance year. This policy aims to alleviate the potential adverse impacts to shared savings determinations that may arise in the event that one or more of the quality measures required under the APP is excluded. We also proposed to make conforming changes to the regulation text § 425.512 by revising paragraph (a)(5)(i) and adding paragraph (a)(7).

We finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69845) that unscored measures are removed from the calculation of an ACO's health equity adjustment, effectively receiving a performance scaler of 0 for those measures. However, we inadvertently did not codify this policy in the Code of Federal Regulations. Therefore, in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52433), we proposed to codify this policy by revising § 425.512(b)(3)(ii)(B) to state that CMS assigns a value of 0 for each measure that CMS does not evaluate because the measure is unscored. We proposed that the regulation text changes would be effective for performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years as the policy was finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule to calculate the health equity adjustment for performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years.

We also proposed that quality measures impacted by the MIPS policy at § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A) are unscored measures for the purposes of calculating the health equity adjustment; therefore, excluded measures would not render an ACO ineligible for the health equity adjustment as long as the ACO reports all required measures under the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for all required measures and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1).

We proposed a change to the MIPS policy to remove the 10 percent threshold for changes to codes, clinical guidelines, or measure specifications for all measure types and are finalizing this policy as proposed (88 FR 52592 and 52593). We believe that our proposal to apply a floor to an ACO's Quality performance category score in determining the ACO's quality performance standard in the event that the ACO's total available measure achievement points used to calculate the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score for the performance year is reduced under § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A) functions in concert with our proposal being finalized in section IV.A.1.b.(2)(d) of this final rule. We refer readers to section IV.A.1.b.(2)(d) of this final rule for further discussion of the finalized changes to the MIPS scoring policy.

The following is a summary of the comments we received on the proposal to establish a Shared Savings Program scoring policy for excluded APP measures and our response.

Comment: All comments we received were in support of the proposal to apply a Shared Savings Program scoring policy for excluded APP measures. Several commenters stated that these changes will ensure that ACOs are not negatively impacted by measure changes or benchmark issues that occur mid-year and are outside the ACO's control.

Response: Although several commenters stated that the proposed changes will ensure that ACOs are not negatively impacted by benchmark issues, we did not consider applying the proposed scoring policy to measures with benchmark issues as we were developing the proposals for the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule.

Under § 414.1380(b)(1)(i)(A), beginning with the CY 2023 performance period/2025 MIPS payment year, for eCQMs and MIPS CQMs, that meet the MIPS data completeness requirement but do not have a benchmark (for example, a historical or performance period benchmark) will receive zero achievement points (or 3 points for small practices). The scoring policies applicable to eCQMs and MIPS CQMs would also be applicable to Medicare CQMs beginning in performance year 2024. Given that the Shared Savings Program does not determine which quality measures do not have a benchmark and that ACOs do not have a choice of measures they can report under the APP, we do not want to adversely impact shared savings determinations for events outside the ACOs' control, such as in the event a measure does not have a benchmark. Therefore, we are finalizing at § 425.512(a)(7) the proposed policy with modification to include eCQMs, MIPS CQMs, and Medicare CQMs within the APP measure set that do not have a benchmark as described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(i)(A). We are also clarifying that this policy will not apply if an ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score is not impacted by measure exclusion or the lack of a benchmark.

We also sought public comment on our proposal to revise § 425.512(b)(3)(ii)(B) to state that, for the purposes of calculating the health equity adjustment to an ACO's quality score, CMS assigns a value of 0 for each measure that CMS does not evaluate because the measure is unscored. We proposed that the regulation text changes would be effective for performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years as the policy to calculate the health equity adjustment for performance year 2023 and subsequent performance years was finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule. Additionally, we proposed that quality measures impacted by the MIPS policy at § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A) are unscored measures for the purposes of calculating the health equity adjustment; therefore, excluded measures would not render an ACO ineligible for the health equity adjustment as long as the ACO reports all required measures under the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for all required measures and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1). We note that our summary of comment and response for this proposal is not sequential to the policy's placement in our proposed rule. The placement here is not consequential to the finalization of the policy.

We did not receive public comments on these proposals; and therefore, we are finalizing these policies as proposed.

After consideration of the public comments, to determine whether the ACO meets the quality performance standard required to share in savings at the maximum rate under its track (or payment model within a track), we are finalizing at § 425.512(a)(7) that for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, if an ACO reports all of the required measures, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter for each measure in the APP measure set and receiving a MIPS Quality performance category score as described at § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year when the ACO meets either of the following:

(i) The ACO's total available measure achievement points used to calculate the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score is reduced under § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A) of this subchapter.

(ii) At least one of the eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs does not have a benchmark as described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(i)(A) of this subchapter.

We are also finalizing conforming changes to § 425.512 by revising paragraph (a)(5)(i) and adding paragraph (a)(7).

In proposing to bifurcate our scoring policies for the performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years we inadvertently failed to update § 425.512(b)(3)(i) to properly refer to the new § 425.512(a)(7). Among other things, § 425.512(b)(3)(i) applies the health equity adjustment calculated pursuant to § 425.512(b) to performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. 210 We are finalizing a modification to add the determination of quality performance score for an ACO affected by this Shared Savings Program Scoring Policy to the list of uses of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score. Specifically, we are revising redesignated paragraph (b)(4)(i) to read as follows: In determining whether the ACO meets the quality performance standard as specified under paragraphs (a)(4)(i)(A), (a)(5)(i)(A)(1), (a)(5)(i)(B), and (a)(7) of this section.

210 Except in the case of an ACO that meets the quality performance standard pursuant to § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(B).

g. Require Spanish Language Administration of the CAHPS for MIPS Survey

(1) Background

We have created official translations of the CAHPS for MIPS survey in seven languages, including Spanish, Cantonese, Korean, Mandarin, Portuguese, Russian, and Vietnamese (81 FR 77386), in addition to the required administration of English survey. However, use of these translations is mostly voluntary, with the exception of a requirement to administer the Spanish translation of the CAHPS for MIPS Survey for patients residing in Puerto Rico. Organizations (groups, virtual groups, subgroups, and APM entities) that elect CAHPS for MIPS must contract with a CMS-approved survey vendor to administer the survey and must request survey translations for the vendor to administer the survey in an optional language. Generally, the use of survey translations adds additional survey administration cost to the organization.

(2) Revisions

As discussed in section IV.A.4.f.(1)(c)(ii) of this final rule, we proposed to require Spanish language administration of the CAHPS for MIPS survey for organizations that elect CAHPS for MIPS. Specifically, we proposed to require organizations to contract with a CMS-approved survey vendor that, in addition to administering the survey in English, will administer the Spanish survey translation to Spanish-preferring patients using the procedures detailed in the CAHPS for MIPS Quality Assurance Guidelines beginning with 2024 survey administration. This proposal is part of our efforts to advance health equity. We refer readers to section IV.A.4.f.(1)(c)(ii) of this final rule for further discussion of our proposal related to the CAHPS for MIPS survey.

The Quality Payment Program proposed Spanish language survey administration requirement for the CAHPS for MIPS Survey can be found in section IV.A.4.f.(1)(c)(ii) of this final rule. Comments received for the Spanish language requirement for the Shared Savings Program are included in section IV.A.4.f.(1)(c)(ii) with comments received by the Quality Payment Program. We refer readers to section IV.A.4.f.(1)(c)(ii) of this final rule, where we finalize this policy as proposed.

h. Align CEHRT Requirements for Shared Savings Program ACOs With MIPS

(1) Background

Many of our programs require the use of certified electronic health record (EHR) technology (CEHRT), including the Quality Payment Program, Shared Savings Program, and other value-based payment initiatives. For the Shared Savings Program, section 1899(b)(2)(G) of the Act requires participating ACOs to define processes to report on quality measures and coordinate care, such as through the use of telehealth, remote patient monitoring, and other such enabling technologies. In addition, section 1899(b)(3)(D) of the Act authorizes the Secretary to incorporate reporting requirements and incentive payments from section 1848 of the Act into the Shared Savings Program, such as requirements and payments related to electronic prescribing and electronic health records, including using alternative criteria for determining whether to make such incentive payments. Under these authorities, we have incorporated reporting requirements related to the adoption and use of CEHRT in our regulations, including specifically cross-referencing the Quality Payment Program's definition of CEHRT (§ 414.1305) in our regulatory definition of CEHRT at § 425.20. For the Shared Savings Program and Quality Payment Program, CEHRT currently is defined at § 414.1305 as EHR technology (which could include multiple technologies) certified by the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) under the ONC Health IT Certification Program as meeting the 2015 Edition Base EHR definition, set forth at 45 CFR 170.102, and a designated set of the 2015 Edition health information technology (IT) certification criteria as further provided therein.

The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH Act), sections 13001 through 13424 of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) (Pub. L. 111-5, February 17, 2009), established ONC under the Department of Health and Human Services, authorizing ONC to adopt standards for certifying health IT. ONC has codified its standards, implementation specifications, certification criteria, and certification program for health IT under 45 CFR part 170. Specifically, ONC has codified its certification criteria for health IT, including EHRs, at 45 CFR 170.315, which are currently referred to as the “2015 Edition health IT certification criteria.” For more information regarding ONC's current policies, standards, and certification requirements for health IT, please refer to 45 CFR part 170, particularly § 170.315, and the ONC Certification of Health IT website at https://www.healthit.gov/topic/certification-ehrs/certification-health-it.

In the CY 2019 PFS final rule (83 FR 59982 through 59988), we adopted three key requirements related to ACOs' use of CEHRT, beginning with the performance years starting on January 1, 2019.

First, ACOs must certify annually, at the end of each performance year, that the percentage of eligible clinicians participating in the ACO who use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers meets or exceeds the applicable percentage during the current performance year. The ACO's eligible clinicians must use CEHRT that meets the definition in our regulation at § 425.20, which provides that CEHRT has the same meaning as under the Quality Payment Program at § 414.1305. Specifically, we updated our regulations at § 425.506(f) to reflect that, beginning with the performance years starting on January 1, 2019:

• ACOs in a track that does not meet the financial risk standard to be an Advanced APM, which includes ACOs participating under BASIC track Levels A through D, must certify annually that at least 50 percent of the eligible clinicians participating in the ACO use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers.

• ACOs in a track that meets the financial risk standard to be an Advanced APM, which includes ACOs participating under BASIC track Level E or the ENCHANCED track, must certify annually that the percentage of eligible clinicians participating in the ACO that use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers meets or exceeds the threshold established under the Quality Payment Program at § 414.1415(a)(1)(i). Under this requirement, for performance years beginning in 2019, 75 percent of eligible clinicians must use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or health care providers.

Second, we also revised the Shared Savings Program requirements for data submission and certifications at § 425.302(a)(3)(iii) to require the ACO to certify at the end of each performance year, that the percentage of eligible clinicians participating in the ACO that use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers meets or exceeds the applicable percentage specified by CMS at § 425.506(f).

Finally, we updated our regulations at § 425.20 to incorporate the definition of CEHRT at § 414.1305 that applies under the Quality Payment Program. The Quality Payment Program's regulation at § 414.1305 defines CEHRT as EHR technology (which could include multiple technologies) certified under the ONC Health IT Certification Program that meets the 2015 Edition Base EHR definition at § 170.102 and has been certified as meeting certain other criteria set forth in ONC's 2015 Edition health IT certification criteria at § 170.315 as further described in § 414.1305. Applying the Shared Savings Program's definition at § 425.20, ACOs under the Shared Savings Program must use EHR technology meeting the Quality Payment Program's definition of CEHRT at § 414.1305 to meet the requirements set forth in our regulation at § 425.506(f). In the Health Data, Technology, and Interoperability: Certification Program Updates, Algorithm Transparency, and Information Sharing proposed rule (88 FR 23746 through 23917), which appeared in the April 18, 2023, Federal Register , ONC has proposed to discontinue the year-themed “editions,” which ONC first adopted in 2012, to distinguish between sets of health IT certification criteria finalized in different rules. ONC has proposed to instead maintain a single set of “ONC Certification Criteria for Health IT,” which would be updated in an incremental fashion in closer alignment to standards development cycles and regular health information technology (IT) development timelines (88 FR 23757 through 23762).) As further discussed in section IV.A.4.f.(4)(c) of this final rule, we are finalizing our proposal to modify the Quality Payment Program's definition of CEHRT at § 414.1305 to flexibly incorporate any changes by ONC to its definition of Base EHR and its certification criteria for Health IT.

(2) Removing CEHRT Use Threshold Requirements and Requiring Reporting of the MIPS Promoting Interoperability Performance Category

To streamline CEHRT threshold requirements for ACOs and align with the Quality Reporting Program's Merit-Based Incentive Payment System (MIPS), we proposed to sunset the Shared Savings Program CEHRT threshold requirements and modify our regulations at § 425.506(f) to indicate that they will be applicable only through performance year 2023 (88 FR 52433). We further proposed, for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, unless otherwise excluded, to require that all MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), and Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305 of this subchapter) participating in the ACO, regardless of track, satisfy all of the following:

• Report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability (PI) performance category measures and requirements to MIPS according to 42 CFR part 414 subpart O as either of the following—

++ All MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and partial QPs participating in the ACO as an individual, group, or virtual group; or

++ The ACO as an APM entity.

• Earn a MIPS performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level.

A MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity may be excluded from the requirements proposed at § 425.507(a) if the MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity—

• Does not exceed the low volume threshold set forth at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii);

• Is an eligible clinician as defined at § 414.1305 who is not a MIPS eligible clinician and has opted to voluntarily report measures and activities for MIPS as set forth in § 414.1310(b)(2); or

• Has not earned a performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category because the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category has been reweighted in accordance with applicable policies set forth at § 414.1380(c)(2).

We proposed to codify this new requirement at § 425.507.

Specifically, we proposed that any requirements applicable to MIPS eligible clinicians reporting on objectives and measures specified by CMS for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category would apply to MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs participating in an ACO at § 425.507(a). We further proposed that if any of these requirements for a MIPS eligible clinician reporting for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category, including objectives and measures, are amended through rulemaking (such as adoption, modification, or removal of an objective or measure), then the new or modified requirements will also be applicable to MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs participating in an ACO under § 425.507. For instance, in section IV.A.4.f.(4) of this final rule, we proposed several modifications to the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category's requirements, including modifying the performance period at § 414.1320, as well as specific measures such as the High Priority Safety Assurance Factors for EHR Resilience (SAFER) Guides measure. To the extent these or other policies are finalized through rulemaking, then these requirements would also be applicable to ACO participants as provided by our proposal here.

To further align with applicable requirements for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category, we proposed that MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, Partial QPs, and ACOs as APM entities may be exempt from our proposed regulation at § 425.507(a) if the MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity: (1) does not exceed the low volume threshold set forth at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii); (2) is an eligible clinician as defined at § 414.1305 who is not a MIPS eligible clinician and has opted to voluntarily report measures and activities for MIPS as set forth in § 414.1310(b)(2); or (3) has not earned a performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category because the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category has been reweighted in accordance with applicable policies set forth at § 414.1380(c)(2). However, if such MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs do report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category as an individual, group, or virtual group or the ACO reports MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category as an APM entity, the MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QP the exemption would not apply for purposes of satisfying our proposed regulation at § 425.507 (88 FR 52433).

Exclusions to MIPS eligible clinicians described at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii) include eligible clinicians who do not exceed the MIPS low volume threshold. Eligible clinicians who are not MIPS eligible clinicians have the option to voluntarily report measures and activities for MIPS as described at § 414.1310(b)(2). Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHC) or Rural Health Clinics (RHC) who provide services that are billed exclusively under the FQHC or RHC payment methodologies may voluntarily report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category as a group, virtual group, or APM entity. MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs practicing in FQHCs or RHCs who provide services that are billed exclusively under FQHC or RHC payment methodologies may voluntarily report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category as an individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity. It is important to note that exclusions to MIPS eligible clinicians as described at § 414.1310(b)(1)(i) and (ii) are not applicable to our proposal at § 425.507 because QPs and Partial QPs are required to report MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category for purposes of satisfying the Shared Savings Program proposal at § 425.507. Examples of applicable exclusions under § 414.1380(c)(2) for reweighting of the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category include, but are not limited to, the following:

• MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs participating in the ACO who are granted a hardship exception under § 414.1380(c)(2)(i)(C) at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level.

• MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs that are eligible for reweighting of the Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level as described at § 414.1380(c)(2)(i)(A)(4).

• MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs that are eligible for reweighting of the Promoting Interoperability performance category as described at § 414.1380(c)(2)(i)(A)( 4 ). 211

211 In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52435), we referenced the exclusion for MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs that are eligible for reweighting of the Promoting Interoperability performance category as described at § 414.1380(c)(2)(i)(A)( 4 ) twice in error. This error has been addressed in this final rule.

Incorporating MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category's requirements into the Shared Savings Program will alleviate the burden that the current policy creates for ACOs. Because the Shared Savings Program CEHRT attestation requirement and the MIPS Promoting Interoperability category requirements are not the same, ACOs have the burden of managing compliance with two different CEHRT program requirements. In finalizing the Shared Savings Program CEHRT attestation in the CY 2019 PFS final rule, we stated our desire to continue to promote and encourage CEHRT use by ACOs and their ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers, and our desire to better align with the goals of the Quality Payment Program and the criteria for participation in certain alternative payment models tested by the Innovation Center (83 FR 59983). Given our unified goal and vision for the use of CEHRT, our proposal at § 425.507 will allow ACOs to focus on a unified set of program requirements for the use of CEHRT and reduce the administrative burden of managing compliance with a different set of program requirements with the same aim.

While ACOs would be able to report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level for purposes of satisfying our proposed policy at § 425.507, we encourage ACOs to evaluate reporting the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the APM entity level for purposes of satisfying the Shared Savings Program regulation proposed at § 425.507. In the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we finalized a policy to introduce a voluntary reporting option for APM entities to report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the APM entity level beginning with the CY 2023 performance period (87 FR 70033). For purposes of MIPS scoring and payment adjustments, if the ACO reports the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the APM entity level, the APM entity's score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category would be the first score identified to generate the APM entity level score. If the ACO does not report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the APM entity level, the ACO's individual and group scores would be calculated as a weighted average up to the APM entity level to generate the APM entity level score for purposes of scoring the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category. If an eligible clinician reports the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual or group level under traditional MIPS or the APM Performance Pathway (APP) in addition to reporting the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance at the APM entity level via the APP, for purposes of MIPS scoring and payment adjustments, that eligible clinician would receive the higher of their individual, group, or APM entity Promoting Interoperability performance category score. For more information about reporting the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the APM entity level, we direct readers to the MIPS Promoting Interoperability User Guide, which is updated each performance year, in the QPP Resource library at https://qpp.cms.gov/resources/resource-library. We anticipate releasing subregulatory guidance for ACOs that participate in the Shared Savings Program about voluntarily reporting the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the APM entity level in future performance years.

We solicited comments on our proposal that, for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2024, unless otherwise excluded, to require that all MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), and Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305) participating in the ACO, regardless of track, satisfy all of the following:

• Report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability (PI) performance category measures and requirements to MIPS according to 42 CFR part 414 subpart O as either of the following—

++ All MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and partial QPs participating in the ACO as an individual, group, or virtual group; or

++ The ACO as an APM entity.

• Earn a MIPS performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level.

A MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity may be excluded from the requirements proposed at § 425.507(a) if the MIPS eligible clinician, QP, Partial QP, or ACO as an APM entity—

• Does not exceed the low volume threshold set forth at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii);

• Is an eligible clinician as defined at § 414.1305 who is not a MIPS eligible clinician and has opted to voluntarily report measures and activities for MIPS as set forth in § 414.1310(b)(2); or

• Has not earned a performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category because the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category has been reweighted in accordance with applicable policies set forth at § 414.1380(c)(2).

We proposed to codify this new requirement at § 425.507.

We also solicited comments on an alternative proposal to narrow the proposal to require ACOs to report the measures and requirements under the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category, in accordance with our regulations at 42 CFR part 414 subpart O, at the APM entity level. This alternative proposal would remove the option for MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), and Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305) participating in the ACO to report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, or virtual group level for purposes of satisfying our proposal at § 425.507.

We received public comments on these proposals. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: We received a few comments in support of the proposal to align CEHRT requirements with MIPS, citing the importance of meaningful CEHRT use and of expanding provider participation in Promoting Interoperability. One commenter also stated that the proposal will support CMS' goal of advancing eCQM capabilities among ACO participants, since use of CEHRT includes the ability to standardize the capture and reporting of data relevant for quality reporting. Another commenter supported aligning CEHRT requirements because it would lead to comprehensive reporting requirements across ACOs and facilitate better care coordination.

Response: We thank commenters for their support.

Comment: Several commenters were opposed to the proposal citing concerns that the proposal would increase administrative burden, especially for small practices, and discourage participation in the Shared Savings Program.

Response: We are finalizing with modifications our proposal to align the Shared Savings Program CEHRT requirement with MIPS Promoting Interoperability to clarify the requirement that an ACO participant, ACO provider/supplier, and ACO professional that is a MIPS eligible clinician, Qualifying APM Participant (QP), or Partial Qualifying APM Participant (Partial QP) (each as defined at § 414.1305 of this chapter) satisfy all of the requirements detailed at § 425.507(a). In response to the commenters' concerns that our proposal would increase administrative burden and discourage participation in the Shared Savings Program, our intent is to allow the ACO to exclude an ACO participant, ACO provider/supplier, or ACO professional from reporting MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category in accordance with applicable policies that exclude or otherwise exempt eligible clinicians from reporting the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category as set forth in 42 CFR part 414 subpart O, provided however, that an ACO participant, ACO provider/supplier, or ACO professional cannot be excluded from the requirements specified in § 425.507(a) solely on the basis of being a QP or Partial QP. We are finalizing our proposal with modifications to make clear the examples of exclusions that would be applicable to the requirements specified at § 425.507(a). Applicable exclusions to paragraph (a) may include the following:

• Low volume threshold as set forth at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii),

• Eligible clinician as defined at § 414.1305 of this chapter who is not a MIPS eligible clinician as set forth in § 414.1310(b)(2),

• Reweighting of the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category to zero percent of the final score in accordance with applicable policies set forth at § 414.1380(c)(2).

These modifications are consistent with our original proposal that the Shared Savings Program's CEHRT requirements fully align with MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category's requirements (88 FR 52434).

For example, if an ACO has 40 ACO participants that are MIPS eligible clinicians and 10 of the ACO participants do not earn a MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category score because the ACO participants did not exceed the low volume threshold as set forth at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii), then the ACO does not count in its public reporting the 10 ACO participants that did not earn a MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category score because the ACO participants did not exceed the low volume threshold.

In another example, if in the ACO in the example above, 5 of the 10 ACO participants that did not exceed the low volume threshold as set forth at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii), voluntarily report under the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category, those 5 ACO participants must be included in the in the number of ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, or ACO professionals that the ACO publicly reports. In this example, the ACO must publicly report the 35 ACO participants [(30 ACO participants without an exclusion) + (5 ACO participants that voluntarily reported) = 35 ACO participants] that earned a MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category score. The ACO in this example does not count in its public reporting the 5 ACO participants that did not earn a MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category score because the ACO participants did not exceed the low volume threshold.

In response to the comment regarding burden to small practices, we are assessing the appropriateness of exemptions to the requirements at § 425.507(a) based on Special status as defined at § 414.1305 and may address this in future rulemaking. We also note that the new reporting option to report MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the ACO level, in addition to group reporting options, will help alleviate individual clinician reporting burden.

ACOs will have access to the MIPS eligibility status of the eligible clinicians that participate in the ACO at our website at https://qpp.cms.gov . ACOs are encouraged to check their participant's MIPS eligibility before and during the performance year to ensure that they have the most up to date eligibility information.

Comment: Several commenters stated that they believe that this reporting requirement would create a disincentive for ACOs to participate in an Advanced APM and obtain QP status. Many commenters believed that the proposal is at odds with MIPS policies that exclude QPs and Partial QPs from reporting MIPS. One commenter stated that QP determinations at the National Provider Identifier (NPI) level, instead of the ACO entity level, will initiate significant reporting challenges for ACOs that have to report for both QP and non-QP providers. One commenter was concerned that the Advanced APM must require all participating eligible clinicians to use CEHRT, citing that this could have the unintended consequence of limiting non-physician qualified health care professional participation in APMs due to financial constraints.

A few commenters had concerns that this requirement negates the benefit of APM participation for providers that alleviated some of the administrative reporting burden under MIPS. These commenters noted that they believe that aligning ACO reporting to the MIPS Promoting Interoperability requirements undercuts a primary benefit of APM participation for individual providers, thus weakening the incentive to participate in the program.

Response: In response to commenters' concerns about additional burden for QPs and Partial QPs, the new reporting option to report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the ACO level, in addition to group reporting options, will help alleviate individual clinician's reporting burden.

Regarding commenters' statements that they believe that this reporting requirement would create a disincentive for ACOs to participate in an Advanced APM and obtain QP status, we wish to clarify that QP and Partial QP status are dependent, in part, on the APM being compliant with the Advanced APM criteria set forth at § 414.1415. Our proposal to align the Shared Savings Program's CEHRT requirement with MIPS Promoting Interoperability is compliant with the policy we are finalizing in section IV.A.4.n. of this final rule regarding Advanced APMs' requirement to use CEHRT for PY 2025 and subsequent performance years. This policy will sunset the current 75 percent CEHRT use requirement for Advanced APMs and replace it with a requirement that to be an Advanced APM, the APM must require all eligible clinicians in each participating APM Entity, or for APMs in which hospitals are the participants, each hospital, to use CEHRT. This policy is consistent with section 1833(z)(3)(D)(i)(I) of the Act, which generally requires that Advanced APMs require their participants to use CEHRT as defined in section 1848(o)(4) of the Act (88 FR 52627). As such, for Level E of the BASIC Track and the ENHANCED track of the Shared Savings Program to be eligible to be considered Advanced APMs in PY 2025 and subsequent performance years, the Shared Savings Program needs to update our CEHRT requirement to align with our proposal for CEHRT use for Advanced APMs, as well as maintain compliance with the other Advanced APM criteria detailed at § 414.1415.

Comment: Several commenters were concerned about the timeline for the implementation of this requirement given that ACOs must remove practices from their ACO participation list before the final rule is published. Commenters also had concerns that the proposed timeline does not allow ACOs time to bring small practices into compliance with CEHRT requirements. Many commenters urged CMS to delay the implementation of these proposals.

Response: We recognize the concerns raised by commenters that finalizing this requirement for the PY 2024 would limit ACO's ability to work with their new ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and ACO professionals to meet the CEHRT and MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category reporting requirement. Therefore, after consideration of the public comments we received on this proposal, we have decided to delay implementation of this requirement to performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2025. The proposal would promote consistent CEHRT use across all Shared Savings Program ACOs, advance digital quality measurement, promote interoperability among clinicians through greater availability of digital data, and further align the Shared Savings Program with MIPS.

Comment: A few commenters opposed the proposal to align the Shared Savings Program's CEHRT requirements with MIPS, citing the different goals and functions of MIPS, the Shared Savings Program, and APMs. One commenter stated that that MIPS measures quality within point-in-time encounters by clinicians, whereas ACOs coordinate care across the continuum.

Response: The MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category's reporting requirements are more comprehensive than the Advanced APM requirements and address key functions that can facilitate better care coordination and quality measurement and improvement. For example, the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category requires clinicians to demonstrate use of CEHRT and attest that they engage in activities to support CEHRT use and health information exchange, as well as activities to prevent information blocking or actions that limit interoperability. In contrast, the Shared Savings Program attestation requirement provides limited insight into CEHRT capabilities and use by ACOs.

MIPS and more advanced value-based arrangements, like the Shared Savings Program, operate on a continuum, with clinicians making decisions annually about whether to continue in MIPS or join more advanced payment models. 212 As we advance towards our goal to have all people with Traditional Medicare in an accountable care relationship with a health care provider by 2030, as outlined in our Innovation Strategy Refresh which can be accessed at https://www.cms.gov/priorities/innovation/strategic-direction-whitepaper, alignment between MIPS and advanced value-based arrangements, like the Shared Savings Program, will ease the transition to accountable care. When value-based models are aligned, it becomes easier for health care providers to understand how they can succeed and provide high quality care, which lowers barriers to participation and accelerates adoption of value-based arrangements.

212 “The Medicare Value-Based Care Strategy: Alignment, Growth, And Equity”, Health Affairs Forefront, July 21, 2022. DOI: 10.1377/forefront.20220719.558038.

Comment: One commenter sought clarification on the impact on the ACO if individual clinicians within the ACO do not meet the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category's reporting requirements.

Response: We thank commenters for their comments. We are making an additional modification to paragraph (b) to specify exclusions that may be applicable for purposes of satisfying the Shared Savings Program requirements at § 425.507(a). Specifically, we are clarifying in § 425.507(b) our intention that any applicable policies that exclude or otherwise exempt eligible clinicians from reporting the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category as set forth in 42 CFR part 414, subpart O also apply to exclude ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and ACO professionals from meeting the reporting requirement set forth in § 425.507(a). However, we are also clarifying in § 425.507(b), an ACO participant, ACO provider/supplier, or ACO professional cannot be excluded from the requirements specified in § 425.507(a) solely on the basis of being a QP or Partial QP; we expect QPs and Partial QPs in an ACO to report MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category unless they are excluded or exempt from doing so under another applicable MIPS policy. This is consistent with our original proposal that the Shared Savings Program's CEHRT requirements fully align with MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category's requirements (88 FR 52435). Together, these modifications more clearly delineate the obligations of ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and ACO professionals under this policy.

We refer readers to Table 31 of this final rule for a non-exhaustive list of exclusions for that may be applicable to reporting the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category for purposes of satisfying the Shared Savings Program CEHRT policy for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2025.

* Certain exclusions to MIPS eligible clinician are described at § 425.507(b)(1) and (b)(2). ** Reweighting of the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category are described at § 425.507(b)(3).

It may be helpful to note that an FQHC or RHC that bills exclusively under the FQHC or RHC payment methodologies and that meets one or more of the exclusions described at § 425.507(b) and in Table 31 of this final rule for the applicable performance year are not required to report and/or earn a score in the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category for purposes of satisfying the Shared Savings Program CEHRT Alignment policy for that performance year. Similarly, the ACO does not count in the number of ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and ACO professionals that the ACO publicly reports an FQHC or RHC that bills exclusively under the FQHC or RHC payment methodologies and meets one or more of the exclusions described at § 425.507(b) and in Table 31 of this final rule for the applicable performance year, unless that FQHC or RHC voluntarily reports under the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category.

Beginning in PY 2025 and subsequent performance years, if an ACO fails to meet the requirements at § 425.507 and § 425.308(b)(9), CMS may take remedial action before termination for noncompliance as described at § 425.216, which includes providing a warning notice, requesting a corrective action plan (CAP) from the ACO, or placing the ACO on a special monitoring plan.

ACOs are required to manage their ACO participant and ACO provider/supplier lists. Additionally, to address noncompliance with the requirements of the Shared Savings Program and other program integrity issues, including those identified by CMS, participant agreements must permit the ACO to take remedial action against the ACO participant, and must require the ACO participant to take remedial action against its ACO providers/suppliers, including imposition of a corrective action plan, denial of incentive payments, and termination of the ACO participant agreement as detailed at § 425.116(a)(7).

Comment: One commenter suggested that the goal of this proposal could better be achieved by requesting that EHR developers pull data automatically from CEHRT systems and report this data to provide CMS with data regarding adoption, use, and interoperability of CEHRT with less burden to ACOs.

Response: We note that the commenter's suggested approach could lead to under-reporting of the use of CEHRT, which would not support our goal of ensuring that ACO participants have robust CEHRT capabilities, nor would it provide a complete and accurate picture of ACO capabilities and could lead to compliance actions as previously noted. Our proposal to align the Shared Savings Program CEHRT requirement with MIPS Promoting Interoperability is the best way to allow ACOs to focus on a unified set of program requirements for the use of CEHRT. Additionally, the new reporting option to report MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the ACO level, in addition to group reporting options, will help alleviate individual clinician reporting burden.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing, with modification and minor technical corrections, our proposal to align the Shared Savings Program's CEHRT requirements with MIPS, to delay the implementation of these amended policies until PY 2025. The modification to delay implementation of this proposal by 1-year is responsive to public feedback raising concerns that finalizing this requirement for the PY 2024 would limit ACO's ability to work with new ACO participants on their CEHRT readiness. This delay will allow ACOs ample time to consider the readiness of ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and ACO professionals that are MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), or Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) to meet the requirements of the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category.

We are finalizing our proposal with modification to our new CEHRT reporting policy at § 425.507(a) for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2025, unless otherwise excluded, an ACO participant, ACO provider/supplier, and ACO professional that is a MIPS eligible clinician, Qualifying APM Participant (QP), or Partial Qualifying APM Participant (Partial QP) (each as defined at § 414.1305), regardless of track, must satisfy all of the following:

• Report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability (PI) performance category measures and requirements to MIPS according to 42 CFR part 414, subpart Oat the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level.

• Earn a MIPS performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level.

We are finalizing at § 425.507(b) that an ACO participant, ACO provider/supplier, or ACO professional is excluded from the requirements specified in § 425.507(a) in accordance with applicable policies that exclude or otherwise exempt eligible clinicians from reporting the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category as set forth in 42 CFR part 414, subpart O, provided however, that an ACO participant, ACO provider/supplier, or ACO professional cannot be excluded from the requirements specified at § 425.507(a) solely on the basis of being a QP or Partial QP. Applicable exclusions may include:

• Low volume threshold as set forth at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii) of this chapter.

• Eligible clinician as defined at § 414.1305 of this chapter who is not a MIPS eligible clinician as set forth in § 414.1310(b)(2) of this chapter.

• Reweighting of the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category to zero percent of the final score in accordance with applicable policies set forth at § 414.1380(c)(2) of this chapter.

We are finalizing our proposal with modifications to codify this new requirement at § 425.507.

(3) Updating Public Reporting Requirements

As described in the CY 2019 final rule (80 FR 32813 through 32815), we believe that one important aspect of patient-centered care is patient engagement and transparency, which can be achieved by the public reporting of ACO quality and cost performance. Public reporting helps to hold ACOs accountable and may improve a beneficiary's ability to make informed health care choices, as well as facilitate an ACO's ability to improve the quality and efficiency of its care. To ensure our public reporting requirements reflect our proposal to require reporting of objectives, measures, and activities under the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category as discussed above, in CY 2024 final rule (85 FR 52436) we also proposed to require ACOs to publicly report the number of MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), and Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305) participating in the ACO that earn a MIPS performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level as proposed at § 425.507. We proposed to codify this requirement at § 425.308(b)(9).

We proposed that MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs who would be excluded from reporting under the proposed regulation at § 425.507(b) as discussed previously may be excluded from the number of MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, or Partial QPs that the ACO publicly reports under our proposed regulation at § 425.308(b)(9). However, if such MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs do report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category as an individual, group, or virtual group, or the ACO reports the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category as an APM entity, the MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs should be included in the number of MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs that the ACO publicly reports under our proposed regulation at § 425.308(b)(9).

We received public comments on these proposals. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: One commenter supported the proposal to publicly report the number of MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs participating in the ACO that earn a MIPS performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level. This commenter supported the public reporting requirement as a way to hold ACOs more accountable.

Response: We thank commenters for their support.

Comment: One commenter did not support the public reporting requirement, citing that this information could fluctuate often and would be confusing to Medicare beneficiaries instead of being informative.

Response: Public reporting may improve a beneficiary's ability to make informed health care choices, as well as facilitate an ACO's ability to improve the quality and efficiency of its care. As such, this requirement will ensure that our public reporting requirements reflect our proposal to require reporting of objectives, measures, and activities under the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category and promote robust CEHRT use and capabilities by ACOs.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing with modifications our proposal to update the Shared Savings Program public reporting requirements to delay the implementation of these revisions until PY 2025. The modification to delay implementation of this proposal by 1-year aligns with our modification to delay the implementation of our proposal to align the Shared Savings Program CEHRT requirement with MIPS. We are also finalizing modifications to our proposal at § 425.308(b)(9) to conform with our language finalized at § 425.507.

Lastly, as we discussed in our proposal if MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, and Partial QPs that are excluded under § 425.507(b) report the MIPS PI performance category, the MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, or Partial QPs should be included in the number of MIPS eligible clinicians, QPs, or Partial QPs that the ACO publicly reports under our proposed regulation at § 425.308(b)(9) (88 FR 52436). We are finalizing modifications to our proposal at § 425.308(b)(9) to make clear in our regulation text that ACOs must include in the public reporting the number of ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and ACO professionals that are excluded under § 425.507(b) that voluntarily reported and received a MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category score for the applicable performance year.

We are finalizing that for performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, the total number of ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and ACO professionals that are MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), or Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305 of this chapter) that earn a MIPS performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category as set forth in § 425.507, that is comprised of the following—

• The number of ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and ACO professionals that meet the requirements of § 425.507(a) and are not excluded under § 425.507(b) for the applicable performance year; and

• The number of ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and ACO professionals that are excluded under § 425.507(b) that voluntarily reported and received a MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category score for the applicable performance year.

(4) Updating Annual Certification Requirements

We find that the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category's reporting requirements are more comprehensive and better address the key functions that facilitate better care coordination and quality measurement for ACOs. Our proposal to align the Shared Savings Program CEHRT requirements with MIPS would allow for greater insight into CEHRT use among ACO clinicians.

Currently, under § 425.302(a)(3)(iii), at the end of each performance year, ACOs must certify that the percentage of eligible clinicians participating in the ACO that use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers meets or exceeds the applicable CEHRT threshold percentage specified at § 425.506(f). As discussed in section III.G.2.h.(2) of this final rule, we proposed to sunset the Shared Savings Program CEHRT threshold requirements and modify § 425.506(f) to indicate that they will end with performance year 2023.

To ensure our certification requirements align with our proposal in section III.G.2.h.(2) of this final rule, we also proposed to revise our regulation at § 425.302(a)(3)(iii) to make the current Shared Savings Program Annual Certification requirement applicable for only performance years 2019 through 2023. That is, we proposed to sunset the CEHRT certification requirement in the Shared Savings Program by amending regulations to no longer require ACO clinicians to report the percentage of eligible clinicians participating in the ACO that use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers meets or exceeds the applicable percentage specified at § 425.506(f).

We solicited comments on our proposal to sunset the CEHRT certification requirement in the Shared Savings Program at §§ 425.302(a)(3)(iii) and 425.506(f) and to add new requirements at § 425.507, as previously discussed. We also solicited comments on our proposal to add a new requirement for public reporting in § 425.308(b)(9), as previously discussed.

We did not receive public comments on our proposal to modify our annual certification requirement at § 425.302(a)(3)(iii). We are finalizing our proposal with modification to delay the alignment of the Shared Savings Program CEHRT requirement with MIPS Promoting Interoperability until PY 2025. Specifically, we are finalizing revisions to our regulation at § 425.302(a)(3)(iii) to make the current Shared Savings Program Annual Certification requirement applicable for only performance years 2019 through 2024.

i. MIPS Value Pathway (MVP) Reporting for Specialists in Shared Savings Program ACOs—Request for Information (RFI)

In the CY 2021 PFS proposed rule (85 FR 50232 and 50233), we proposed that for performance year 2021 and subsequent performance years, ACOs would be assessed on a measure set under the APP for Shared Savings Program ACOs. As part of finalizing the APP measure set (85 FR 34727), we stated that the transition to the APP measure set was intended to reduce reporting burden and eliminate differences in the way ACOs are scored compared to their MIPS eligible clinicians, while also moving toward a more outcome-based, primary care focused measure set. Additionally, we stated that we selected the measures to be included because they are broadly applicable for the primary care population and population health goals that are associated with the Shared Savings Program.

We received public comments raising concerns about the challenges and applicability of these measures to specialists that are part of their ACOs (85 FR 34727). Commenters provided feedback that: reducing the number of ACO quality measures would make specialists less likely to participate in the Shared Savings Program; the proposed measures are not relevant to ophthalmology specialty practices and suggested that the same measure sets used in MIPS be permitted for reporting through the APP or a protocol be put in place to determine if the measures are relevant to the clinicians reporting under the APP; CMS should work with interested parties to refine the current set of measures to make it more appropriate for ACOs, which are responsible for total cost of care for the populations they serve; CMS should clarify if the outcome measures selected are representative of all of the different types of populations that ACOs treat and recommended that CMS take patient compliance and case mix into consideration when selecting measures because some patients may take longer to achieve health goals and ACOs may not have the same relative volume of patients with diagnoses such as diabetes and hypertension.

In the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39270), we solicited comments on reporting options for specialist providers within an ACO. Specifically, we stated that we have heard from interested parties that the population health/primary care focused measures in the APP are not applicable for specialist providers within an ACO. We noted in the final rule that we may consider feedback we received to inform future rulemaking (86 FR 65264).

In the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65376), MVPs were finalized to be available for reporting beginning with the CY 2023 performance period of MIPS, with the notion that MVPs will be implemented through notice and comment rulemaking over the next few years to offer clinically relevant quality reporting for specialists and more granular specialty data (through subgroup reporting) for patients to make informed decisions about the care they receive. Building upon our commitment to align quality measures across CMS, 213 we refer readers to Appendix 3: MVP Inventory, where we finalize the maintenance changes to the Value in Primary Care MVP. We noted that the primary care MVP would create continuity between the primary care measures assessed under MIPS and the measures providers would be accountable for in the Medicare Shared Savings Program.

213 Jacobs D, Schreiber M, Seshamani M, Tsai D, Fowler E, Fleisher L. Aligning Quality Measures across CMS—The Universal Foundation. New England Journal of Medicine, March 2, 2023, available at https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp2215539 .

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52437), we noted that in light of the public comments described above and the finalization and continued development of the MVPs, we believe we need incentives for specialists in Shared Savings Program ACOs to report clinically relevant quality measures and to allow patients, referring clinicians, and ACOs to have more information regarding specialists involved in patient care. We believe that encouraging specialists to report on MVPs will lead to increased specialty engagement in the Shared Savings Program, thereby holding specialists accountable for quality improvement.

Beginning in CY 2023, specialists that report under MIPS, including specialists that participate in Shared Savings Program ACOs, have the option to register to report MVPs for the applicable CY performance period as described at § 414.1365(b) as a group, subgroup, or individual and to report on relevant MVP quality measures as described at § 414.1365(c). In the proposed rule, we solicited comments on scoring incentives that would be applied to an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score beginning in performance year 2025 when specialists who participate in the ACO report quality MVPs as described at § 414.1365(c)(1) (88 FR 52437).

We described in the proposed rule that, similar to the health equity adjustment finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69838), we are considering bonus points for ACOs with specialists reporting quality MVPs as described at § 414.1365(c)(1) that would be applied after MIPS scoring is complete (88 FR 52437). ACOs may receive up to a maximum of 10 additional points added to their ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score if they meet the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1), in addition to administering the CAHPS for MIPS survey. In addition to specialists that participate in the ACO reporting quality MVPs described at § 414.1365(c)(1), an ACO would be required to report all measures in the APP measure set, meet the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 and receive a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) to be eligible for bonus points.

As stated in our proposed rule, our overarching intent is to have specialists participate in ACOs in a meaningful way and to collect quality data that is comparable to data reported by other specialty providers in quality MVPs (88 FR 52437). We solicited comments on our overall approach to align quality measures in the Adult Universal Foundation with measures used for evaluation in the Medicare Shared Savings Program. We also solicited comments on the following aspects of MVP reporting for specialists in Shared Savings Program ACOs:

• In order to highlight specialty clinical practice within ACOs, how should we encourage specialist reporting of MVPs?

• How should we encourage the reporting of MVPs to collect quality data that is comparable to data reported by other specialty providers in quality MVPs and to address clinician concerns over measure appropriateness?

• How should we consider encouraging specialists to report the MVP that is most relevant to their clinical practice?

• How should we distinguish bonus points for ACOs that report on a larger volume of patients through MVPs?

• How should we provide ACOs with bonus points to their health equity adjusted quality performance score when an ACO's specialty clinicians report MVPs?

• What concerns and considerations should we be aware of when assessing ACOs for quality performance based on reporting quality measures within MVPs?

• Would incentivizing specialty MVPs create a disincentive for ACOs to report primary care focused APP and/or MVP measures?

• In the event that MIPS quality measures in MVPs are excluded under § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A), should we apply the proposed Shared Savings Program scoring policy for excluded APP measures as described in section III.G.2.f. of this final rule?

As previously noted, providing ACOs with bonus points to their health equity adjusted quality performance score when ACOs' specialty clinicians report MVPs serves to encourage reporting of MVPs. Therefore, we do not intend to establish bonus points as a permanent policy. We solicited comments on how long we should have bonus points in place in order to incentivize MVP reporting. Once specialists are reporting MVPs, overall aggregate specialty performance within an ACO could be assessed. We solicited comments on if and how CMS should consider assessing overall specialty performance as part of the APP in the future.

We noted that in section IV.A.1.b. of this final rule, we included an RFI on how we can leverage MIPS policies to enable more Medicare beneficiaries to benefit from accountable care relationships within APMs and provide rigorous performance standards for those clinicians who report MVPs and remain in MIPS. We appreciate the feedback we received in response to this comment solicitation. We may consider this information to inform future rulemaking.

j. Revisions to the Requirement To Meet the Case Minimum Requirement for Quality Performance Standard Determinations

(1) Background

For the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive for performance year 2024 and for the extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy (§ 425.512(a)(2), (a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ), (c)(3)), we require ACOs to meet the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 to determine the quality performance standard for ACOs in the first performance year of their first agreement period.

Section 414.1380 includes policies related to all of MIPS scoring and is not specific to the Quality performance category. Further, the phrase “case minimum” is mentioned in multiple paragraphs at § 414.1380. The broad reference to § 414.1380 under § 425.512(a)(2), (a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ), and (c)(3) does not specify which paragraph at § 414.1380 is applicable when applying case minimum for purposes of determining an ACO's quality performance standard. We believe that the references to meeting the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 in the context of determining an ACO's quality performance standard under § 425.512(a)(2), (a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ), and (c)(3) is not sufficient in describing our policy's intent, which is to apply the MIPS Quality performance category scoring policies as described at § 414.1380(b)(1) in determining the ACO quality performance standard.

(2) Revisions

To alleviate confusion regarding the reference to case minimum in determining the ACO quality performance standard for performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, we proposed to replace the references to meeting the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 from § 425.512(a)(2), (a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ), and (c)(3) with the requirement that the ACO must receive a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) in order to meet the quality performance standard (88 FR 52438). As described in our proposed rule, this revision would correct the purpose of our reference to case minimums by incorporating all of the applications of case minimums in the MIPS Quality performance category scoring policies in our policies to determine an ACO's quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program (88 FR 52438). For example, under current policy at § 414.1380(b)(1)(i)(A)( 2 )( ii ) in performance year 2024, if an ACO does not meet the case minimum requirement on an administrative claims-based measure, that measure would be excluded from the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category measure achievement points (numerator) and total available measure achievement points (denominator). If the ACO in this example meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for the ten CMS Web Interface measures or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and administers a CAHPS for MIPS survey, the ACO would receive a MIPS Quality performance category score. The resulting MIPS Quality performance category score in this example would be used to determine the ACO's quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program.

All ACOs that participated in the Shared Savings Program were affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance as described at § 425.512(c)(1) for performance years 2021, 2022, and 2023 due to the COVID-19 public health emergency. As stated in our proposal, we believe that any unintended impact of meeting the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 in evaluating an ACO's quality performance standard for performance years 2021, 2022, and 2023 was mitigated by the application of the extreme and uncontrollable circumstance policy (88 FR 52438). Specifically, we stated that it is not our intent to exclude an ACO who received a MIPS Quality performance category score, but reported less than 20 cases on any measure(s) in the APP measure set from achieving the quality performance standard under § 425.512(a)(2), (a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ), and (c)(3), if that ACO is otherwise eligible to meet the quality performance standard (88 FR 52438).

Separately, we proposed to address a gap in the current rule regarding the “minimum beneficiary sampling requirement” at § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) (88 FR 52439). This policy provides for a 10-point reduction in the total available measure achievement points for MIPS eligible clinicians that submit five measures or fewer and register for the CAHPS for MIPS survey but do not meet the minimum beneficiary sampling requirement. As we stated in our proposal, the case minimum is not applicable to the CAHPS for MIPS survey, we did not intend to preclude ACOs that do not meet the minimum beneficiary sampling requirement to field a CAHPS for MIPS survey from meeting the Shared Savings Program quality performance standard or the alternative quality performance standard (88 FR 52439). We proposed revisions to the following regulation text sections:

• At § 425.512(a)(2)(ii) and (iii), we proposed to replace the phrase “case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 of this subchapter” with the phrase “receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter.”

Additionally, we proposed to replace the phrase “CAHPS for MIPS survey” with the phrase “CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter)” (88 FR 52439). To read as follows: For the first performance year of an ACO's first agreement period under the Shared Savings Program, the ACO would meet the quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program, if:

++ For performance year 2024. If the ACO reports data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter on the ten CMS Web Interface measures or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, and the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter), and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, for the applicable performance year.

++ For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years. If the ACO reports data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter on the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter), and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, for the applicable performance year.

• At § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ), we proposed to remove the phrase “and the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 of this subchapter.” As follows: If the ACO reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and achieving a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining five measures in the APP measure set.

++ We are not including a requirement under § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ) for the ACO to receive a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1). As described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii), the MIPS Quality performance category score is the sum of all the measure achievement points divided by the sum of total available measure achievement points for the quality performance category. As stated in our proposal, it would not be appropriate to require an ACO to receive a MIPS Quality performance category score in determining whether the ACO met the Shared Savings Program quality performance standard based on measure-level performance (such as in the case of the eCQM/MIPS CQM reporting incentive) (88 FR 52439).

• At § 425.512(c)(3)(iii), we proposed to remove the phrase “case minimum” for performance 2024 and subsequent performance years and replace with the phrase “receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter.” To read as follows: For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, if the ACO reports quality data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year.

We proposed to revise § 425.512(a)(5)(iii)(A) and (B) to read as follows:

• For performance year 2024, the ACO does not report any of the ten CMS Web Interface measures, any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter) under the APP.

• For performance year 2025 and subsequent years, the ACO does not report any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter) under the APP.

Additionally, we proposed to add clarifying language to the proposed redesignated paragraph (b)(2) of § 425.512 on calculating an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score as follows:

• For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, CMS would calculate the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score as the sum of: the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score for all measures in the APP measure set, and the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points calculated in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section, to which the sum of these values may not exceed 100 percent, if the following requirements are met: (1) The ACO reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs in the APP measure set; (2) meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 for the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs; and (3) administers the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B)).

The following is a summary of the comments we received on these proposals and our responses.

Comment: Two commenters supported our proposal to revise the requirement to meet the case minimum requirement for quality performance standard determinations. One commenter stated that they believe that this proposal will better incorporate all case minimums in the MIPS Quality performance category scoring policy to determine an ACO's quality performance standard under the Shared Savings Program.

Response: We appreciate the commenters' support.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing the policies as proposed. For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, we are finalizing our proposal to replace the references to meeting the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 from § 425.512(a)(2), (a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ), and (c)(3) with the requirement that the ACO must receive a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) in order to meet the quality performance standard. We are also finalizing our proposal to address a gap in the current rule regarding the “minimum beneficiary sampling requirement” at § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) (88 FR 52439). We are also finalizing revisions to the following regulation text sections as proposed:

• At § 425.512(a)(2)(ii) and (iii), replace the phrase “case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 of this subchapter” with the phrase “receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter.”

• To replace the phrase “CAHPS for MIPS survey” with the phrase “CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter).” To read as follows: For the first performance year of an ACO's first agreement period under the Shared Savings Program, the ACO will meet the quality performance standard if it meets the requirements under this paragraph (a)(2).

++ For performance year 2024. If the ACO reports data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter on the ten CMS Web Interface measures or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, and the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter), and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, for the applicable performance year.

++ For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years. If the ACO reports data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter on the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter), and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, for the applicable performance year.

• At § 425.512(a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ), to remove the phrase “and the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 of this subchapter.” To read as follows: If the ACO reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and achieving a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining five measures in the APP measure set.

• At § 425.512(c)(3)(iii), to remove the phrase “case minimum” for performance 2024 and subsequent performance years and replace with the phrase “receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter.” To read as follows: For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, if the ACO reports quality data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year.

We are finalizing our proposal to revise § 425.512(a)(5)(iii)(A) and (B) to read as follows:

• For performance year 2024, the ACO does not report any of the ten CMS Web Interface measures, any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter) under the APP.

• For performance year 2025 and subsequent years, the ACO does not report any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter) under the APP.

Additionally, we are finalizing the addition of clarifying language to the redesignated paragraph (b)(2) of § 425.512 on calculating an ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score as follows:

• For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. For an ACO that reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, and administers the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter), CMS calculates the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score as the sum of the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score for all measures in the APP measure set and the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points calculated in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section. The sum of these values may not exceed 100 percent.

3. Determining Beneficiary Assignment Under the Shared Savings Program

a. Modifications to the Step-Wise Assignment Methodology and Approach To Identifying the Assignable Beneficiary Population

(1) Background

(a) Background on Assignment Methodology

Section 1899(c)(1) of the Act, as amended by the CURES Act and the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, provides that the Secretary shall determine an appropriate method to assign Medicare FFS beneficiaries to an ACO based on their utilization of primary care services provided by physicians in the ACO and, in the case of performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2019, services provided by a FQHC or RHC. As we have explained in earlier rulemaking, the term “assignment” for purposes of the Shared Savings Program in no way implies any limits, restrictions, or diminishment of the rights of Medicare FFS beneficiaries to exercise freedom of choice in the physicians and other health care practitioners from whom they receive covered services. In the context of the Shared Savings Program, “assignment” refers to an operational process by which Medicare will determine whether a beneficiary has chosen to receive a sufficient level of certain primary care services from physicians and other health care practitioners associated with a specific ACO so that the ACO may be appropriately designated as exercising basic responsibility for that beneficiary's care. 214

214 See for example, 76 FR 67851, and 83 FR 67863.

The regulations governing the assignment methodology under the Shared Savings Program are in 42 CFR part 425, subpart E. Under claims-based assignment, we determine a Medicare FFS beneficiary is assigned to an ACO if the beneficiary meets the criteria in § 425.401(a) to be eligible for assignment to an ACO, and the beneficiary's utilization of primary care services meets the criteria established under the assignment methodology specified in §§ 425.402 and 425.404. Section 425.402 specifies a step-wise assignment methodology for determining an ACO's assigned beneficiary population based on beneficiaries' use of primary care services. In accordance with § 425.402(b)(1), as a “pre-step” in the two-step claims-based assignment process, CMS identifies all beneficiaries who had at least one primary care service furnished by a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO and who is a primary care physician as defined under § 425.20 or has one of the primary specialty designations specified in § 425.402(c). This pre-step is designed to satisfy the statutory requirement under section 1899(c)(1) of the Act that beneficiaries be assigned to an ACO based on their use of primary care services furnished by physicians participating in the ACO. Beneficiaries who meet the pre-step requirement are then assigned to an ACO through either one of two steps specified in § 425.402(b)(3) and (b)(4).

Under the first step of the assignment process, a beneficiary who is eligible for assignment and meets the pre-step requirement is assigned to an ACO if the allowed charges for primary care services furnished to the beneficiary during the assignment window by primary care physicians, nurse practitioners (NPs), physician assistants (PAs), and clinical nurse specialists (CNSs) who are ACO professionals in the ACO are greater than the allowed charges for primary care services furnished during the assignment window by primary care physicians, NPs, PAs, or CNSs who are ACO professionals in any other ACO, or not affiliated with any ACO and identified by a Medicare-enrolled billing TIN. The second step of the assignment methodology applies to the remainder of the beneficiaries who are eligible for assignment and meet the pre-step requirement, who have not had a primary care service rendered during the assignment window by any primary care physician, NP, PA, or CNS, either inside or outside the ACO. The beneficiary will be assigned to an ACO if the allowed charges for primary care services furnished to the beneficiary during the assignment window by physicians who are ACO professionals with specialty designations specified in § 425.402(c) are greater than the allowed charges for primary care services furnished during the assignment window by physicians with such specialty designations who are ACO professionals in any other ACO, or who are unaffiliated with an ACO and are identified by a Medicare-enrolled billing TIN.

The Shared Savings Program step-wise assignment process is offered in two similar, but distinct, claims-based assignment methodologies, prospective assignment and preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. Consistent with the requirements of section 1899(c)(2)(A) of the Act, we offer all Shared Savings Program ACOs the opportunity to select their assignment methodology annually, starting with agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019. We use the same step-wise assignment methodology under § 425.402 to assign beneficiaries to ACOs under prospective assignment and ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation.

In the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32699), we finalized the definition of “assignment window” under § 425.20 to mean the 12-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO. As described in the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 67861), the assignment window for ACOs under prospective assignment is a 12-month period offset from the calendar year (for example, October through September preceding the calendar year), while for ACOs under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, the assignment window is the 12-month period based on the calendar year. Operationally, in determining beneficiary assignment for each performance year and benchmark year, we identify allowed charges for services billed under the HCPCS and CPT codes included in the applicable definition of primary care services under § 425.400(c), and according to the step-wise assignment methodology specified in subpart E of the Shared Savings Program's regulations, during all months of the 12-month period of the assignment window.

The step-wise assignment methodology was initially established with the November 2011 final rule and was modified through subsequent rulemaking. For instance, with the June 2015 final rule, we modified the approach to include claims for primary care services furnished by non-physician practitioners (NPs, PAs, and CNSs) in step 1 of the assignment methodology rather than in step 2, and to exclude services provided by certain physician specialties from step 2 of the assignment process. We refer readers to the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67853 through 67858) and the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32748 through 32755) for a discussion of the relevant background and related considerations. Generally, as we have previously explained in rulemaking (see, for example, 76 FR 67853 through 67855; see also 80 FR 32748 and 32754), the step-wise assignment methodology maintains the statutory requirement to conduct claims-based beneficiary assignment based on beneficiaries' utilization of physician primary care services, recognizing the necessary and appropriate role of certain specialists in providing primary care services, such as in areas with primary care physician shortages. Further, including services furnished by NPs, PAs, and CNSs in determining where a beneficiary has received the plurality of primary care services in step 1 of the assignment methodology helps ensure that a beneficiary is assigned to the ACO whose ACO participants are actually providing the plurality of primary care for that beneficiary, and thus, should be responsible for managing the patient's overall care, or is not assigned to any ACO if the plurality of the beneficiary's primary care is furnished by practitioners in a non-ACO entity (see, for example, 80 FR 32748).

Various Shared Savings Program operations are based on the ACO's assigned population, or consider the size of the ACO's assigned population, which are summarized as follows:

• Within the Shared Savings Program's financial methodology:

++ CMS determines benchmark and performance year expenditures based on the ACO's assigned population as specified under subpart G of the regulations.

++ CMS determines the counties to include in the ACO's regional service area based on the ACO's assigned population (refer to definition of ACO's regional service area in § 425.20), and uses the ACO's assigned population in determining the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO (see §§ 425.601(a)(5)(v) and 425.652(a)(5)(v)) which is applied in calculating the two-way blend of national and regional growth rates used to trend forward BY1 and BY2 expenditures to BY3 according to §§ 425.601(a)(5)(iv) and 425.652(a)(5)(iv) and as part of the blended growth rates used to update the benchmark according to §§ 425.601(b) and 425.652(b)(2). CMS also uses the ACO's regional service area to determine the regional adjustment to the ACO's historical benchmark according to § 425.656.

++ CMS considers the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population that is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid and the difference between the ACO's weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 taken across the four Medicare enrollment types and when calculating the offset factor applied to negative regional adjustments (see § 425.656(c)(4)).

++ CMS considers the size of the ACO's assigned population in calculating the proration factor when determining the ACO's eligibility for the prior savings adjustment (see § 425.658(b)(3)), as well as in determining the minimum savings rate (MSR)/minimum loss rate (MLR) for ACOs that select the option to have their MSR/MLR calculated based on the number of beneficiaries assigned to the ACO (refer to § 425.605(b)(2)(i)(C) (BASIC track) and § 425.610(b)(1)(iii) (ENHANCED track)).

++ CMS determines average prospective HCC risk scores for assigned beneficiaries for purposes of adjusting assigned beneficiary expenditures for severity and case mix (refer to §§ 425.601(a)(3) and (10), 425.605(a)(1), and 425.610(a)(2), (3) and (10)), adjusting for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's assigned beneficiary population and the assignable beneficiary population for the ACO's regional service area according to §§ 425.601(a)(8)(i)(C) and 425.656(b)(3), and adjusting the flat dollar amount ACPT for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's BY3 assigned beneficiary population and the national assignable FFS population according to § 425.660(b)(4).

• In determinations related to an ACO's eligibility for participation for the Shared Savings Program:

++ CMS determines expenditures based on the ACO's assigned population when identifying if the ACO is a high revenue or low revenue ACO (as defined under § 425.20).

++ CMS considers whether an ACO meets the requirement to have at least 5,000 Medicare FFS assigned beneficiaries (see § 425.110).

++ CMS uses the ACO's number of assigned beneficiaries in calculating and recalculating the amount of the repayment mechanism required for ACOs participating under a two-sided model (see § 425.204(f)).

• For ACOs eligible to receive AIPs (see § 425.630(b)), CMS considers the size of the ACO's assigned population and the risk factors-based score of those beneficiaries in determining the quarterly payment amount (see § 425.630(f)).

• For ACOs that meet the reporting requirements for receiving a health equity adjusted quality performance score (see § 425.512(b)), CMS considers the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population that is underserved in determining the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points (see § 425.512(b)(2)(iv)).

• For ACOs affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance, CMS considers the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in an area identified under the Quality Payment Program as being affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance in determining the ACO's quality score (see § 425.512(c)(1)(i)). CMS considers the percentage of the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary population affected by an extreme and uncontrollable circumstance in determining the amount of shared losses owed by ACOs under a two-sided model (refer to §§ 425.605(f)(1) and 425.610(i)(1)).

• For ACOs that have established a beneficiary incentive program, beneficiaries assigned to an ACO who receive a qualifying service are eligible to receive an incentive payment (see § 425.304(c)(3)(ii) through (iv)).

• In accordance with the Shared Savings Program regulations under subpart H, CMS provides ACOs with certain aggregate reports and beneficiary-identifiable claims data on the ACO's assigned beneficiary population.

Further, a non-claims-based process for voluntary alignment applies to all Shared Savings Program ACOs and is used to supplement claims-based assignment. Section 1899(c) of the Act, as amended by section 50331 of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, requires the Secretary to permit a Medicare FFS beneficiary to voluntarily identify an ACO professional as their primary care provider for purposes of assignment to an ACO. In the November 2018 final rule (83 FR 59959 through 59964), we finalized changes to the beneficiary voluntary alignment policies CMS previously established to implement the requirements under section 1899(c)(2)(B) of the Act (refer to § 425.402(e), as revised). In the November 2018 final rule (83 FR 59964), we revised the requirements related to primary care services and practitioner specialties previously established for the voluntary alignment process. As a result of this change, a voluntarily aligned beneficiary is no longer required to receive a primary care service from an ACO professional to be assigned to the ACO in which the beneficiary's designated primary care clinician is participating. Additionally, the revision established that a beneficiary can be voluntarily aligned to an ACO based on their selection of any ACO professional as their primary clinician, regardless of the ACO professional's specialty and including NPs, PAs, and CNSs. As specified in § 425.402(e)(1), and subject to § 425.402(e)(2), assignment under voluntary alignment supersedes any assignment that otherwise may have occurred under claims-based assignment.

(b) Background on Identification and Uses of the Assignable Beneficiary Population Under the Shared Savings Program

To identify the assignable beneficiary population, which is used in program financial calculations, we apply a similar logic as is used to identify the Medicare beneficiaries who can be assigned to an ACO in the pre-step to the claims-based assignment methodology (see, for example, 81 FR 5843, and 81 FR 37985). In the June 2016 final rule (81 FR 37950), we finalized policies to use the assignable beneficiary population (a subset of the larger population of Medicare FFS beneficiaries) as the basis of certain calculations that had previously been based on the overall Medicare FFS population, including expenditures used to trend and update ACOs' historical benchmarks and to establish the truncation thresholds used in expenditure calculations. In the June 2016 final rule (see 81 FR 37985 through 37988), we finalized the definition of “assignable beneficiary” under § 425.20 to mean a Medicare FFS beneficiary who receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 12-month assignment window from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c). We specified that the assignable population used to calculate national and regional benchmarking factors was to be identified using the 12-month calendar year assignment window corresponding to the benchmark or performance year for all ACOs, regardless of assignment methodology which applied to the ACO, which at that time was determined by an ACO's track. We explained our belief that using assignable beneficiaries across all program calculations based on national and regional FFS expenditures would result in factors that are generally more comparable to ACO expenditures than factors based on the overall Medicare FFS population, which can include non-utilizers of health care services and other beneficiaries not eligible for assignment (see, for example, 81 FR 5843 and 5844).

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69929 through 69932), we finalized a modification to this policy, applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, to calculate risk-adjusted regional expenditures and the share of assignable beneficiaries assigned to an ACO using county-level values based on the assignable population identified using an assignment window that is consistent with the ACO's assignment methodology selection for the applicable performance year. (Refer to §§ 425.652(a)(5)(v)(A) and (b)(2)(iv)(A), and 425.654(a)(1)(i).) Under this approach, for ACOs selecting prospective assignment, we will use an assignable population of beneficiaries that is identified based on the offset assignment window (for example, October through September preceding the calendar year) and for ACOs selecting preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, we will use an assignable population of beneficiaries identified based on the calendar year assignment window (87 FR 69930). We also specified in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69931) that we would continue to compute all factors used in calculations that are based on the national assignable FFS population using an assignable population identified based on the calendar year assignment window. For ACOs participating under agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, and before January 1, 2024, we will continue to identify the assignable population that is the basis for calculating national and regional factors using the 12-month period based on a calendar year, which aligns with the assignment window for preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, regardless of the ACO's assignment methodology. (See § 425.601. See also 87 FR 69929, for a description of relevant background.)

The assignable beneficiary population is used in various calculations under the Shared Savings Program, including the following:

• CMS determines the 99th percentile of national Medicare FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for purposes of truncating beneficiary expenditures in order to minimize variation from catastrophically large claims (see §§ 425.601(a)(4) and (c)(3), 425.605(a)(3), 425.610(a)(4)(ii), 425.652(a)(4), and 425.654(a)(3)).

• CMS determines average county FFS expenditures based on expenditures for the assignable population of beneficiaries in each county of an ACO's regional service area (see §§ 425.601(c) and 425.654(a)) for purposes of calculating the ACO's regional FFS expenditures (see §§ 425.601(d) and 425.654(b)). CMS also determines the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO (see §§ 425.601(a)(5)(v) and 425.652(a)(5)(v)). The ACO's regional FFS expenditures and the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO are used in the following calculations:

++ Trend forward BY1 and BY2 expenditures to BY3 according to §§ 425.601(a)(5) and 425.652(a)(5).

++ Determine the blended growth rates used to update the benchmark according to §§ 425.601(b) and 425.652(b)(2).

++ Determine the adjustment to the ACO's benchmark according to §§ 425.601(a)(8) and 425.652(a)(8).

• CMS determines national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for purposes of capping the regional adjustment to the ACO's historical benchmark according to §§ 425.601(a)(8)(ii)(C) and 425.656(c)(3), capping the prior savings adjustment according to § 425.652(a)(8)(iv), and determining a flat dollar amount ACPT according to § 425.660(b)(3).

• CMS determines national growth rates for assignable beneficiaries that are used to trend forward BY1 and BY2 expenditures to BY3 according to §§ 425.601(a)(5)(ii) and 425.652(a)(5)(ii) and to determine the blended growth rates used update the benchmark according to §§ 425.601(b)(2) and 425.652(b)(2)(i).

• CMS determines average prospective HCC risk scores for assignable beneficiaries for purposes of adjusting county FFS expenditures for severity and case mix of assignable beneficiaries in the county according to §§ 425.601(c)(4) and 425.654(a)(4), calculating the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark by adjusting for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's assigned beneficiary population and the assignable beneficiary population for the ACO's regional service area according to §§ 425.601(a)(8)(i)(C) and 425.656(b)(3), and adjusting the flat dollar amount ACPT for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's BY3 assigned beneficiary population and the national assignable FFS population according to § 425.660(b)(4).

(c) Concerns About Beneficiaries Excluded From the Current Assignment Methodology Based on the Pre-Step Requirement and Definition of an Assignable Beneficiary

We have established a goal that 100 percent of beneficiaries enrolled in Original Medicare be involved in a care relationship with accountability for quality and total cost of care by 2030. 215 We have also established health equity as a top priority through our CMS Framework for Health Equity (2022-2032). 216 However, we believe that the assignment pre-step and definition of assignable beneficiary may create barriers for some beneficiaries otherwise eligible for assignment to be assigned to ACOs. Revising the pre-step and definition of assignable beneficiary thus represents an opportunity to expand the assigned and assignable populations.

215 Seshamani M., Fowler E., Brooks-LaSure C., Building On The CMS Strategic Vision: Working Together For A Stronger Medicare. Health Affairs. January 11, 2022. Available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/forefront.20220110.198444.

216 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, The CMS Framework for Health Equity 2022-2032 (April 2022), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/cms-framework-health-equity.pdf.

ACOs and other interested parties have also raised concerns that the current pre-step and definition of assignable beneficiary create barriers for some beneficiaries to be assigned to ACOs. For example, in previous proposed rules, we have received input from commenters that the pre-step requirement, as implemented in the current assignment methodology, systematically excludes from assignment beneficiaries who only received primary care from NPs, PAs, and CNSs. In response to the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, a commenter noted that the current claims-based assignment methodology creates a barrier for NPs and their patients to participate in ACOs. 217

217 See comment letter from American Association of Nurse Practitioners, to Chiquita Brooks-LaSure, Administrator, CMS (September 6, 2022), available at https://www.regulations.gov/comment/CMS-2022-0113-21927.

Additional analysis by CMS has found that expanding the assignment methodology to allow more opportunities for beneficiaries to be assignable based on their receipt of primary care services provided by NPs, PAs, or CNSs would reduce the barriers for underserved beneficiaries to be assigned to ACOs. As described elsewhere in this section of this final rule, we have modeled the impact of revising the step-wise assignment methodology and expanding the definition of an assignable beneficiary. We observed that such an approach could add to the ACO-assigned population 218 and the national assignable population 219 identified under current Shared Savings Program policies a population of beneficiaries that are more likely to be disabled, be enrolled in the Medicare Part D low-income subsidy (LIS) and reside in areas with higher ADI scores. The newly added beneficiaries to the ACO-assigned and national assignable populations also had a lower average prospective HCC risk score, lower total per capita-year spending, higher hospice utilization rate, and higher mortality rate than the ACO-assigned and national assignable populations under current Shared Savings Program policies. Therefore, we believe that adjusting the assignment methodology within the flexibility available under the statute so that additional beneficiaries can be included in the population of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program, and modifying the definition of assignable beneficiary to include a broader population, would make meaningful steps toward greater health equity and align with priorities recently emphasized in our CMS Framework for Health Equity (2022-2032). 220

218 By “ACO-assigned population,” we refer to the population of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs pursuant to the Shared Savings Program assignment methodology specified under 42 CFR part 425, subpart E.

219 By “national assignable population” we refer to the population of beneficiaries that meet the definition of assignable beneficiary under § 425.20, across the national population of Medicare FFS enrollees. We use this term for clarity, in certain contexts, to underscore a reference to the assignable population determined at the national level, across the Medicare FFS population.

220 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, The CMS Framework for Health Equity 2022-2032 (April 2022), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/cms-framework-health-equity.pdf.

(2) Revisions

(a) Overview of Revisions To Incorporate Use of an Expanded Window for Assignment

Section 1899(c)(1)(A) of the Act requires that claims-based assignment to ACOs be based on beneficiaries' utilization of primary care services furnished by ACO professionals who are physicians. In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52440 through 52449), we proposed to use an expanded window for assignment in a new step 3 to the claims-based assignment process to identify additional beneficiaries for ACO assignment (described in section III.G.3.a.(2)(b). of the proposed rule, 88 FR 52444 through 52446), and we proposed to modify the definition of “assignable beneficiary” to be consistent with this use of an expanded window for assignment to identify additional beneficiaries to include in the assignable population after application of the existing methodology (described in section III.G.3.a.(2)(c). of the proposed rule, 88 FR 52446 and 52447). We proposed to add a new definition of “Expanded window for assignment” in § 425.20 to mean the 24-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO, or to identify assignable beneficiaries, or both that includes the applicable 12-month assignment window (as defined under § 425.20) and the preceding 12 months (described in section III.G.3.a.(2)(a). of the proposed rule, 88 FR 52443 through 52444).

The following is a brief summary of the proposed uses of the expanded window for assignment, described in greater detail elsewhere within section III.G.3.a of the proposed rule. First, we proposed that beneficiaries would be assigned to ACOs pursuant to the proposed step 3 to the beneficiary assignment methodology only after the current steps 1 and 2 have been carried out, and step 3 would apply only to beneficiaries who do not meet the pre-step requirement but who received at least one primary care service during the proposed expanded window for assignment with an ACO professional who is a primary care physician or a physician who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c). Beneficiaries qualifying for step 3 would be assigned based on the plurality of allowed charges for primary care services during this expanded window for assignment. Second, the proposed revision to the definition of an assignable beneficiary would similarly include beneficiaries who received at least one primary care service during the proposed expanded window for assignment from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c). In combination with using the expanded window for assignment for identifying beneficiaries who received at least one primary care service from a primary care physician or a physician whose specialty designation is used in assignment, under both the proposed step 3 for assignment and proposed revised definition of an assignable beneficiary, we would continue to consider whether beneficiaries received at least one primary care service during the 12-month assignment window. We proposed that these changes would be effective for the performance year beginning on January 1, 2025, and subsequent performance years.

As we explained in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (see 88 FR 52443 through 52444), a number of factors informed our consideration of the duration of the expanded window for assignment. We stated our belief that a 24-month expanded window for assignment, as opposed to a longer period, would prioritize primary care services that were provided more recently. Through the proposed modifications to the assignment methodology and the definition of assignable beneficiary, we sought to better account for beneficiaries who may be receiving their primary care predominantly from non-physician practitioners during the 12-month assignment window, but who received care from a physician in the preceding 12 months, in recognition of the statutory requirement in section 1899(c) of the Act that claims-based assignment be based on receipt of primary care services from physicians who are ACO professionals. We stated our belief that primary care services furnished by NPs, PAs, and CNSs during the 12-month assignment window could reflect their work in clinical teams in collaboration with and under the supervision of physicians, and thereby represent a continuation of the beneficiary's primary care relationship with a physician from the previous year. Furthermore, use of a 24-month expanded window for assignment would build on experience we have gained and lessons learned from testing Medicare ACO initiatives by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (Innovation Center), specifically from the use of a 2-year beneficiary alignment period in the ACO Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (REACH) Model and the Next Generation ACO (NGACO) Model. 221

221 See, for example, CMS, Center for Medicare & Medicaid Innovation, ACO Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (REACH) Model, PY2023 Financial Operating Guide: Overview, available at https://innovation.cms.gov/media/document/aco-reach-py2023-financial-op-guide (refer to Appendix B, Beneficiary Alignment Procedures). See also, CMS, Center for Medicare & Medicaid Innovation, Next Generation ACO Model Benchmarking Methods (December 15, 2015), available at https://innovation.cms.gov/files/x/nextgenaco-methodology.pdf (refer to Appendix A, Next Generation ACO Model Alignment Procedures). In summary, under the ACO REACH Model and NGACO Model the alignment period consists of two alignment years. The first alignment year is the 12- month period ending 18 months prior to the start of the relevant performance year or base year. The second alignment year is the 12-month period ending 6 months prior to the start of the relevant performance year or base year.

We also explained our belief that it would be timely to propose modifications to the definition of “assignment window” under § 425.20 for improved clarity and consistency with the programmatic applications of the assignment window. Under the existing definition, assignment window means the 12-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO. However, under existing Shared Savings Program policies and under the proposed changes described in section III.G.3.a of the proposed rule, we use the term assignment window in referencing our identification of assignable beneficiaries. Therefore, we proposed to modify the definition of assignment window to mean the 12-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO, or to identify assignable beneficiaries, or both (88 FR 52443).

We solicited comments on proposed modifications to § 425.20, to revise the definition of “assignable beneficiary,” “assignment window,” and add a new definition of “expanded window for assignment”.

We summarize and respond to public comments we received on these proposals elsewhere in this section of this final rule.

(b) Revisions To Add a Step 3 to the Beneficiary Assignment Methodology

For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2025, and subsequent performance years, we proposed to revise the step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology, as described in § 425.402, to include a step 3, which we proposed would utilize the proposed expanded window for assignment to identify additional beneficiaries for assignment among Medicare FFS beneficiaries who were not identified under the existing pre-step. (Refer to 88 FR 52444 through 52446.) Specifically, step 3 would identify all such beneficiaries not identified by the pre-step criterion specified in § 425.402(b)(1), who also meet the following criteria:

(1) Received at least one primary care service with a non-physician ACO professional (NP, PA, or CNS) in the ACO during the applicable 12-month assignment window.

(2) Received at least one primary care service with a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO and who is a primary care physician as defined under § 425.20 or who has one of the primary specialty designations included in § 425.402(c) during the applicable 24-month expanded window for assignment.

A beneficiary meeting the aforementioned criteria would then be assigned to the ACO if the allowed charges for primary care services furnished to the beneficiary by ACO professionals in the ACO who are primary care physicians, non-physician ACO professionals, or physicians with specialty designations included in § 425.402(c) during the applicable expanded window for assignment are greater than the allowed charges for primary care services furnished by primary care physicians, physicians with specialty designations included in § 425.402(c), NPs (as defined at § 410.75(b)), PAs (as defined at § 410.74(a)(2)), and CNSs (as defined at § 410.76(b)) who are ACO professionals in any other ACO or not affiliated with any ACO and identified by a Medicare-enrolled billing TIN.

Further, in order to be assigned to an ACO through the step-wise assignment methodology, we proposed that a Medicare FFS beneficiary would continue to need to meet the eligibility criteria in § 425.401(a) for the 12-month assignment window, regardless of whether the beneficiary is assigned to an ACO in step 1 or 2, or proposed step 3. Under the proposed approach, beneficiaries who do not receive any primary care services during the assignment window would continue to be excluded from claims-based assignment as they are under the current assignment methodology. Beneficiaries who meet the pre-step based on a 12-month assignment window (as specified in § 425.402(b)(1)) but are not assigned to an ACO in steps 1 or 2 would also continue to not be assigned to an ACO as these beneficiaries would not be considered for assignment in step 3. The proposed changes also would not change beneficiary voluntary alignment, which would continue to supersede claims-based assignment, as specified in § 425.402(e).

As specified in § 425.400(a)(3)(ii), beneficiaries who are prospectively assigned to an ACO will remain assigned to the ACO at the end of the benchmark or performance year, unless they meet any of the exclusion criteria under § 425.401(b). As a result, under claims-based assignment, a beneficiary prospectively assigned to an ACO is not eligible for assignment to a different ACO for the same benchmark or performance year. 222 We proposed to continue to apply this approach for beneficiaries prospectively assigned at step 1, step 2, or proposed step 3. In other words, a beneficiary who is assigned to an ACO based on prospective assignment through step 1 or 2 or proposed step 3 would remain assigned to that ACO for the benchmark or performance year (unless they meet any of the exclusion criteria under § 425.401(b)). Under this approach, a beneficiary prospectively assigned to an ACO for a benchmark or performance year would not be assigned to another ACO under prospective assignment or to an ACO under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, even if the other ACO provides the plurality of the beneficiary's primary care services during the relevant benchmark or performance year.

222 See, for example, Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications (version #11, January 2023), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-2 (see section 2.3.2.2, “Prospective Assignment”).

We explained that the use of a 24-month expanded window for assignment would also require changes to the timeframe for which we recognize additional primary care service codes related to the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency (PHE), as outlined in § 425.400(c)(2). Under § 425.400(c)(2), we use certain additional primary care service codes in determining beneficiary assignment under § 425.400(c)(1) when the assignment window for a benchmark or performance year includes any month(s) during the COVID-19 PHE (as defined in § 400.200). In accordance with § 425.400(c)(2)(ii), the additional primary care service codes are applicable to all months of the assignment window, when the assignment window includes any month(s) during the COVID-19 PHE, with the exception of certain additional CPT codes (99441, 99442, and 99443) which we use in determining assignment until they are longer payable under Medicare FFS payment policies (as specified under § 425.400(c)(2)(i)(A)( 2 )). We refer readers to discussions in earlier rulemaking for the development of this policy, including 85 FR 84748 through 84755, 85 FR 84791 through 84793, and 86 FR 65276. We proposed to modify the regulations at § 425.400(c)(2)(i) and (ii) to incorporate references to the expanded window for assignment, such that we would apply the additional primary care service codes to all months of the assignment window or applicable expanded window for assignment when the assignment window or applicable expanded window for assignment includes any month(s) during the COVID-19 PHE (88 FR 52445). We explained that these proposed changes would be necessary to capture the additional codes related to the COVID-19 PHE when using the expanded window for assignment in determining assignment for a benchmark or performance year. 223

223 See, for example, HHS Secretary Xavier Becerra Statement on End of the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency (May 11, 2023), available at https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2023/05/11/hhs-secretary-xavier-becerra-statement-on-end-of-the-covid-19-public-health-emergency.html. See also Letter to U.S. Governors from HHS Secretary Xavier Becerra on renewing COVID-19 Public Health Emergency (PHE) (February 9, 2023), available at https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2023/02/09/letter-us-governors-hhs-secretary-xavier-becerra-renewing-covid-19-public-health-emergency.html (specifying the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services was planning for the COVID-19 PHE to end on May 11, 2023).

The proposed use of an expanded window for assignment in an enhanced step-wise assignment methodology would result in a greater overall number of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs. All beneficiaries who are assigned to an ACO under the current methodology would continue to be assigned to an ACO under the proposed methodology. Under the proposed methodology, a beneficiary who does not meet the current pre-step requirement would also be eligible to be assigned to an ACO if they (a) received at least one primary care service from a NP, PA, or CNS who is an ACO professional in the ACO during the applicable assignment window and (b) received at least one primary care service from a primary care physician or physician with a specialty used in assignment who is an ACO professional in the ACO during the applicable expanded window for assignment.

Under proposed changes, the 12-month assignment window would continue to represent the period used to identify allowed charges for primary care services received from ACO professionals and analogous practitioners not participating in an ACO, for purposes of claims-based beneficiary assignment during steps 1 and 2. Thus, most beneficiaries currently assigned to an ACO under the existing assignment methodology would continue to be assigned to the same ACO under the proposed changes. We anticipated that only a very small share of beneficiaries would be assigned to a different ACO under the proposed assignment methodology, and any change in ACO assignment would be due to the operational order in which assignment is run and the precedence of prospective assignment over preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. Specifically, there may be a small share of beneficiaries who would be prospectively assigned to an ACO under the proposed step 3 for prospective assignment that differs from the retrospective ACO the beneficiary is currently assigned to under steps 1 or 2 for preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. This precedence of prospective assignment follows the current assignment methodology, which currently assigns beneficiaries via steps 1 and 2 of prospective assignment to an ACO that may be different than the ACO to which the beneficiary would have been assigned via steps 1 or 2 if assigned to an ACO under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. For the average retrospective ACO, the share of assigned beneficiaries affected by this precedence of prospective assignment has historically been very small, approximately 1.3 percent from 2018 through 2021.

The proposed addition of step 3 would add a population of otherwise omitted beneficiaries by using the expanded window for assignment to identify the required physician visit with an ACO professional and to determine the plurality of allowed charges for primary care services. Functionally, the beneficiaries who would be newly assigned are beneficiaries who received a primary care service from an ACO professional who is a primary care physician (as defined under § 425.20) or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c) in the 12-month period prior to the assignment window and received a primary care service from a NP (as defined at § 410.75(b)), a PA (as defined at § 410.74(a)(2)), or a CNS (as defined at § 410.76(b)) during the assignment window. Notably, the proposed step 3 would continue to be consistent with section 1899(c)(1)(A) of the Act, because a beneficiary would have to have received a primary care service from a primary care physician or physician with a specialty used in assignment who is an ACO professional in the ACO during the expanded window for assignment to be eligible for assignment to the ACO.

Similar to any other change that affects beneficiary assignment, the proposed use of an expanded window for assignment in a step 3 could impact downstream aspects of the Shared Savings Program that rely on the assigned population, including the following potential effects:

• Larger populations of assigned beneficiaries could contribute to more ACOs meeting minimum size requirements to participate in the program.

• A larger assigned population would result in lower minimum savings rates for ACOs subject to a variable minimum savings rate (that is, ACOs in a one-sided risk model on the BASIC track's glide path or ACOs in a two-sided risk model that elected a variable minimum savings rate). Lower minimum savings rates reflect a lower threshold for ACOs to meet in order to share in savings. Similarly, a larger assigned population would result in a lower minimum loss rate for ACOs participating in a two-sided risk model with a variable minimum loss rate, which reflects a lower threshold for ACOs participating in a two-sided risk model to meet before they must share in losses.

• A larger assigned population would enable higher performance payment limits, which are based on a percentage of an ACO's total benchmark expenditures. As an ACO's assigned beneficiary population increases, so too do the ACO's total benchmark expenditures. Because the maximum shared savings an ACO can earn is determined as a percentage of total benchmark expenditures, a larger assigned population would result in a higher performance payment limit. Similarly, a larger assigned population would result in larger loss sharing limits for ACOs in two-sided risk models because loss sharing limits are also determined as a percentage of aggregate benchmarks.

• A larger assigned population could affect an ACO's revenue status as the ACO's ACO participants' total Medicare Parts A and B FFS revenue would not change but the ACO's assigned beneficiary population's total Medicare Parts A and B FFS expenditures would increase. In other words, revenue-to-expenditure ratios would decrease for ACOs that receive a larger assigned beneficiary population. Compared to the current assignment methodology, the proposed assignment methodology change could result in some ACOs being identified as low revenue instead of high revenue. As a result, other program elements tied to revenue status could then be affected by the proposed changes, specifically an ACO's eligibility for AIPs.

• Changes in the assigned population could directly affect ACOs' average risk scores, mix of beneficiaries across enrollment types, regional service area, and total expenditures during benchmark and performance years.

Expected impacts on several other program elements would depend on differences in the changes observed for beneficiaries added to the assignable population versus beneficiaries added to the ACO's assigned beneficiaries. For example, the impact of the proposed change to the assignment methodology on ACO performance would depend in part on the difference in spending levels and trends between those beneficiaries added to the assignable population, nationally and within an ACO's regional service area, versus those beneficiaries added to the ACO's assigned beneficiary population. The data shared with ACOs on their assignable and assigned beneficiaries would change under the proposed policy as the population of assignable and assigned beneficiaries changes.

We proposed modifications to subpart E of the Shared Savings Program regulations to specify the revised beneficiary assignment methodology. We proposed to specify the new step 3 in a new provision at § 425.402(b)(5). We also proposed technical and conforming changes to incorporate the revised methodology. We proposed to amend § 425.402(b)(1), describing the existing pre-step of the assignment methodology that would remain applicable for step 1 and step 2, to refer to the identification of all beneficiaries who had “at least one primary care service during the applicable assignment window with a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO and who is a primary care physician as defined under § 425.20 or who has one of the primary specialty designations included in [§ 425.402(c)]” (emphasis added to reflect revised text). In § 425.402(c), which indicates the primary specialty designations used in assignment, we proposed to specify that the listed specialties would be considered for ACO professionals in step 2 (as described in § 425.402(b)(4)) and the proposed step 3 (which would become a new provision at § 425.402(b)(5)) of the assignment methodology. In § 425.400(a)(2)(ii), which generally describes quarterly updates to preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, we proposed to specify that assignment would be updated quarterly based on the most recent 12 or 24 months of data, as applicable, under the methodology described in §§ 425.402 and 425.404. Lastly, in § 425.400(a)(3)(i), which generally describes prospective assignment of beneficiaries to ACOs at the beginning of each benchmark or performance year, we proposed to amend the reference that specifies that we base prospective assignment on the beneficiary's use of primary care services in the most recent 12 months for which data are available, to specify instead the beneficiary's use of primary care services in the most recent 12 months or 24 months, as applicable, for which data are available, using the assignment methodology described in §§ 425.402 and 425.404.

We summarize and respond to public comments we received on these proposals elsewhere in this section of this final rule.

(c) Revisions to the Definition of an Assignable Beneficiary

As described in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52446 through 52447), consistent with the previously described proposal to use an expanded window for assignment in an enhanced step-wise assignment methodology, we proposed to revise the definition of Assignable beneficiary in § 425.20 to include additional beneficiaries who would be identified using the expanded window for assignment. Under the proposal, we would continue to utilize the criterion in the existing definition, under which assignable beneficiary means a Medicare FFS beneficiary who receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 12-month assignment window from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c). Further, for the performance year beginning January 1, 2025 and subsequent performance years, we proposed that a Medicare FFS beneficiary who does not meet this requirement but who meets both of the following criteria would also be considered an assignable beneficiary:

• Receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 24-month expanded window for assignment from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c).

• Receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 12-month assignment window from a Medicare-enrolled practitioner who is a NP (as defined at § 410.75(b)), PA (as defined at § 410.74(a)(2)), or a CNS (as defined at § 410.76(b)).

We explained that the proposed use of an expanded window for assignment would result in a greater number of beneficiaries included in the assignable population (88 FR 52446). All beneficiaries who are currently assignable would continue to be assignable under the proposed revisions to the definition of an assignable beneficiary. Under the proposed definition, beneficiaries who do not receive any primary care services during the assignment window would continue to be excluded from the population of assignable beneficiaries, just as they are excluded in the current definition of an assignable beneficiary. In other words, the 12-month assignment window would continue to represent the timeframe within which beneficiaries must receive at least one primary care service to be identified as an assignable beneficiary. Moreover, to identify a broader assignable population under this proposed approach, we specified it would be important to consider the criterion for the beneficiary to have received a primary care service during the 12-month assignment window to be met through a service furnished from a non-physician practitioner (NP, PA, and CNS), or from a primary care physician or a physician who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c) (as is required under the current definition).

The proposed approach to expanding the assignable beneficiary population could impact downstream aspects of the Shared Savings Program that rely on the assignable population, including the following effects:

• Changes in the distribution of expenditures among the national assignable population could affect the thresholds used to truncate expenditures.

• Changes in average per capita expenditures and risk scores among assignable beneficiaries in a given benchmark year could affect the average risk-adjusted spending within ACOs' regional service areas, which could affect regional adjustments.

• Differential changes in average per capita expenditures and risk scores over time could affect trend and update factors that are based on changes in expenditures for the national assignable population and in the risk-adjusted expenditures for the population of assignable beneficiaries in an ACO's regional service area.

• Changes in average prospective HCC risk scores for the national assignable population could affect the factors used to renormalize risk scores each benchmark and performance year and to risk-adjust the flat-dollar ACPT amounts.

• Changes in the number of assignable beneficiaries across ACO regional service areas could affect ACOs' market shares, which determine the weights used for blending the national and regional benchmark trend and update factors.

• Changes in the level of national FFS expenditures for the assignable population could affect the caps applied to the regional adjustment and prior savings adjustment to the historical benchmark and the calculation of the flat-dollar ACPT amount.

Under the current regulations, the time period we use to identify the assignable population that will be used to calculate different factors used in program financial calculations depends on whether it is a national or regional factor, the start date of an ACO's agreement period and, in some cases, an ACO's selected assignment methodology. Under the proposed revised definition of assignable beneficiary, for all ACOs (regardless of agreement period start date), for the performance year beginning on January 1, 2025, and subsequent performance years, for benchmark year and performance year factors based on the national assignable population, we would identify the assignable population using the 24-month expanded window for assignment comprised of the 12-month calendar year assignment window, which aligns with the assignment window for preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, and the preceding 12 months. We noted that under the proposal we would also use the 24-month expanded window for assignment comprised of the 12-month calendar year assignment window and the preceding 12 months when identifying the assignable population for regional factors for performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years for use in calculations for ACOs that are continuing in agreement periods that began before January 1, 2024 (88 FR 52447).

For ACOs participating in agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, for performance year 2025 and in subsequent years for regional factors, we would identify the assignable population using the 24-month expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii). That is, for ACOs selecting preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, we would use the 24-month expanded window for assignment comprised of the 12-month calendar year assignment window and the preceding 12 months. For ACOs selecting prospective assignment, the 24-month expanded window for assignment would be comprised of the 12-month, offset assignment window plus the preceding 12 months. For example, we would use October 1, 2022, to September 30, 2024, as the 24-month expanded window for assignment to identify the assignable population for performance year 2025 for ACOs under prospective assignment.

We proposed technical and conforming changes to provisions in subpart G of the Shared Savings Program regulations that refer to the assignment window used to identify the assignable beneficiary population to incorporate references to the proposed approach to using an expanded window for assignment in identifying the assignable population for performance year 2025 and in subsequent performance years (88 FR 52447). We explained that the regulations establishing the benchmarking methodology for ACOs with agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, do not directly reference the assignment window, and thus would not require conforming changes. However, there are benchmarking methodology provisions for ACOs with agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years that directly refer to the assignment window. Thus, we proposed to amend these provisions to specify that the assignable population would be identified for the relevant benchmark year or the performance year (as applicable) using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii):

• In §§ 425.652(a)(5)(v)(A) and (b)(2)(iv)(A), provisions on calculating the county-level share of assignable beneficiaries who are assigned to the ACO for each county in the ACO's regional service area for purposes of calculating the blended national-regional growth rates used in trending and updating the benchmark (respectively).

• In the provision on redetermination of the regional adjustment for the second or each subsequent performance year during the term of the agreement period in § 425.652(a)(9)(ii).

• In the provision on the calculation of average county FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries in each county in the ACO's regional service area in § 425.654(a)(1)(i).

• In the provision on adjusting for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for BY3 and the assignable beneficiary population for the ACO's regional service area for BY3, in calculating average per capita expenditures for the ACO's regional service area, in § 425.656(b)(3).

Similarly, we also proposed to specify in the new provision at § 425.655(b)(1) that the assignable population that would be used to calculate average county prospective HCC and demographic risk scores for purposes of calculating the proposed regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor (refer to section III.G.4.b. of this final rule) would be identified for the relevant benchmark year or the performance year (as applicable) using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) (88 FR 52447).

We solicited comments on our proposed modifications to the definition of assignable beneficiary in § 425.20. We also solicited comments on our proposed technical and conforming changes to references to the identification of assignable beneficiaries in subpart G of the Shared Savings Program regulations, as well as in the proposed new regulation at § 425.655 (on calculating the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor), to incorporate the use of the assignment window or expanded window for assignment in identification of the assignable beneficiary population.

We summarize and respond to public comments we received on these proposals elsewhere in this section of this final rule.

(d) Simulations To Understand the Potential Effect of Proposed Changes

To understand the potential impact of using an expanded window for assignment to identify assignable beneficiaries, we simulated the impact of using the proposed definition of an assignable beneficiary using data for performance year (PY) 2021. 224 To simplify the analysis, this simulation used CY 2021 as the assignment window. Thus, the expanded window for assignment spanned from January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2021. We used a calendar year basis because we do not expect the impact of the proposed changes to meaningfully differ between retrospective and prospective assignment windows, the latter of which uses an offset window. In this analysis, the national assignable population included a total of 26.2 million beneficiaries based on the current methodology. The simulation applying the proposed policies then added 762,156 newly assignable beneficiaries, growing the national assignable population by about 2.9 percent. Additional analysis on estimated impacts of the proposed changes was included in the Regulatory Impact Analysis in section VI.E. of the proposed rule (see 88 FR 52706 through 52710, and 88 FR 52731). We solicited comments on the proposed approach and the potential effects of the proposed approach, including its effects modeled in the aforementioned simulation and its effects in other scenarios that commenters might have considered. We anticipated continuing additional simulations on the effect of the proposed changes to the assignment methodology to further inform our understanding of the potential impacts of the proposal and indicated that we planned to publish results from such additional simulations in the final rule.

224 In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52448), we incorrectly stated that the simulation used the proposed definition for an assignable beneficiary and proposed step 3, using the set of ACOs and data for performance year 2021. This language inadvertently indicated that we simulated the potential impact of using an expanded window for assignment on both the assignable and ACO-assigned populations. The original simulation only simulated the impact of using an expanded window for assignment on the assignable population.

As described in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, the original simulation results suggest that an expanded window for assignment may increase access to accountable care for underserved beneficiaries. Relative to the national assignable population as determined under the current assignment methodology, the group of added beneficiaries from the expanded window for assignment simulation were more likely to be disabled Medicare enrollees, resided in areas with slightly higher average Area Deprivation Index (ADI) national percentile rank (a measure of neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage), and had a larger share with at least one month of Medicare Part D LIS enrollment (refer to Table 32).

These simulation results also suggest that using a 24-month expanded window for assignment in proposed step 3 of the claims-based assignment methodology would increase access to accountable care among beneficiaries with Medicare coverage for part of a year (such as beneficiaries who die during the performance year). The group of added assignable beneficiaries in the simulation previously described had a lower average prospective HCC risk score, lower total per capita spending in CY 2021, higher hospice utilization, and a higher mortality rate when compared to assignable beneficiaries identified using the current definition of assignable beneficiary. These results suggest that beneficiaries who would be added to the assignable population under the proposed changes may benefit from greater care coordination through ACOs.

We summarize and respond to public comments we received on these considerations elsewhere in this section of this final rule.

(e) Implementation of Revisions

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52449), we proposed that the expanded window for assignment and revised step-wise assignment methodology would be applicable to all ACOs for the performance year beginning on January 1, 2025, and in subsequent performance years. For example, for a calendar year assignment window that runs from January 1, 2025, through December 31, 2025, the expanded window for assignment would run from January 1, 2024, through December 31, 2025. For an offset assignment window that runs from October 1, 2023, through September 30, 2024, the expanded window for assignment would run from October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2024. Consistent with how we have implemented previous changes to the Shared Savings Program assignment methodology, we would use the new methodology each time assignment is determined for a given benchmark or performance year and, as applicable, to determine the eligibility of ACOs applying to enter into or renew participation in the Shared Savings Program. For example, applicant eligibility for PY 2024 will be determined during CY 2023. We explained that we would not be able to review public comments and decide whether to finalize the proposed changes in sufficient time to apply the expanded window for assignment and revised methodology for PY 2024 applications. Additionally, we anticipated that the proposed revised approach, if finalized, would require significant operational changes to the Shared Savings Program assignment methodology, which would take time to prepare in advance of initial use of the approach during the application process. For these reasons, we would not be able to apply the expanded window for assignment and revised step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology for the performance year starting on January 1, 2024, and we proposed to apply this change beginning with the performance year starting on January 1, 2025.

We proposed that we would apply the proposed revised approach to determining beneficiary assignment and the revised definition of assignable beneficiary in establishing, adjusting, updating, and resetting historical benchmarks for ACOs entering new agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2025, and subsequent years. Also consistent with how we have implemented previous changes to the assignment methodology, we proposed that we would adjust benchmarks for all ACOs in agreement periods for which performance year 2025 is a second or subsequent performance year at the start of performance year 2025, so that the ACO benchmarks reflect the use of the same assignment rules and definition of assignable beneficiary as would apply in the performance year (refer to §§ 425.601(a)(9) and 425.652(a)(9)). We noted our belief that the expanded window for assignment and proposed step 3 represent a valuable change that would fill an important gap in the current assignment methodology. We stated that we have outlined a renewed vision and strategy for driving health system transformation to achieve equitable outcomes through high-quality, affordable, person-centered care for all beneficiaries. 225 In a January 2022 article, we stated our goal that 100 percent of people with Original Medicare will be in a care relationship with accountability for quality and total cost of care by 2030. 226 Many Medicare FFS beneficiaries are currently excluded from the assignable and Shared Savings Program assigned populations despite receiving primary care from ACO professional NPs, PAs, and CNSs during the existing 12-month assignment window, and these excluded beneficiaries tend to come from populations characterized by greater social risk factors. We explained more specifically that beneficiaries likely to be added to the assignable population are more likely to be disabled, be enrolled in the Medicare Part D LIS, and reside in areas with higher ADI scores. We explained our belief that the proposed change to the assignment methodology represents an opportunity to not only grow the share of Medicare beneficiaries involved in accountable care relationships but to also support efforts to improve health equity in the Medicare program.

225 See, for example, CMS Innovation Center “Strategic Direction” web page, at https://innovation.cms.gov/strategic-direction . See also, CMS, Innovation Center Strategy Refresh, available at https://innovation.cms.gov/strategic-direction-whitepaper .

226 Seshamani M., Fowler E., Brooks-LaSure C., Building On The CMS Strategic Vision: Working Together For A Stronger Medicare. Health Affairs. January 11, 2022. Available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/forefront.20220110.198444 .

We solicited comments on the proposed changes to establish a new defined term in § 425.20, expanded window for assignment, for use in a proposed additional step 3 in the beneficiary assignment methodology and in identifying the assignable beneficiary population, revisions to the definition of assignable beneficiary, as well as proposed technical and conforming changes to provisions of the Shared Savings Program regulations, including the definition of assignment window under § 425.20, and provisions within subpart E and subpart G. We explained that the proposed changes, if finalized, would be applicable for the performance year beginning on January 1, 2025, and subsequent performance years. We welcomed comments on all aspects of the proposed changes, including the length of the expanded window for assignment. We also solicited comments on additional policies that CMS should consider for potential future rulemaking on our assignment methodology, with the goal of increasing the number of Original Medicare FFS beneficiaries assigned to an ACO, particularly in underserved communities.

We received public comments on the proposals and considerations described in section III.G.3.a of the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: A large majority of commenters addressing our proposed modifications to the assignment methodology and to the definition of an assignable beneficiary were broadly supportive of an approach that would better account for beneficiaries' primary care relationships with non-physician practitioners. Some commenters expressed support for the overall goal of expanding access to accountable care, particularly for beneficiaries in rural and other areas experiencing primary care physician shortages.

Among these commenters, approximately half supported finalizing modifications as proposed. These commenters agreed that proposed changes would better account for beneficiaries' primary care relationships with non-physician practitioners and help bring a greater number of underserved beneficiaries into the Shared Savings Program.

Although generally supporting the proposals, many commenters shared various concerns about the proposed approach to include additional beneficiaries in the assigned and assignable populations based on primary care services provided by non-physician practitioners, and suggested changes to the proposed approach to address these concerns, including changes that may require modifications to other Medicare policies.

Response: We summarize and respond to commenters' specific concerns and suggestions throughout the rest of this section of this final rule. Following consideration of all public comments received, we are finalizing these proposals without modification. We believe these proposals represent important strides toward including additional beneficiaries in the ACO-assigned and the national assignable populations, improving beneficiary access to accountable care (particularly among underserved beneficiaries), and moving toward greater health equity, in alignment with priorities emphasized in our CMS Framework for Health Equity (2022-2032). 227 These changes are also aligned with HHS' Initiative to Strengthen Primary Care 228 because, by better recognizing and considering the variety of clinician types who participate in delivering high-quality primary care, these changes advance coordinated, integrated primary care and promote health equity.

227 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, The CMS Framework for Health Equity 2022-2032 (April 2022), 16-22, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/cms-framework-health-equity.pdf .

228 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Request for Information (RFI): HHS Initiative to Strengthen Primary Health Care, 87 FR 38168 through 38170 (June 27, 2022).

Comment: Many commenters requested additional analysis and information on the potential impact on ACOs of the proposed modifications to the assignment methodology and definition of an assignable beneficiary, asking for more information on either one or a combination of the proposals. One commenter requested that CMS make such additional information available with sufficient time for ACOs to review it prior to entering agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2025. Other commenters, including both those that expressed general support for and others that opposed the proposed changes, asked for further analysis by CMS before finalizing the proposed changes.

Many commenters specifically requested analysis on more years of data than the one year of data used for the simulation analysis described in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule. Some commenters pointed to the simulation of changes to the national assignable population provided in Table 30 of the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (see 88 FR 52448), which relied on PY 2021 data, which they noted was impacted by anomalies related to the COVID-19 pandemic. These commenters suggested that CMS expand this simulation to include data from additional years, such as 2019, 2020, 2021, and 2022.

Several commenters expressed concern that revising the definition of an assignable beneficiary will have varying effects on ACOs' financial performance due to the definition's effect on the national and regional assignable populations, which are used to calculate an ACO's benchmark. In particular, these commenters explained that while CMS estimated that the overall growth in the national assignable population will be small, CMS did not examine changes to regional assignable populations, which are used in certain calculations to adjust and update ACOs' financial benchmarks. As a result, some commenters were concerned that rural ACOs might be disproportionately affected, in part due to their smaller size.

Given these concerns, commenters urged CMS to provide additional analysis of the impact of the revisions to the definition of assignable beneficiary and proposed step 3 to assess financial and performance-related factors, including the following:

• Impacts to ACO benchmarks.

• Potential changes to regional factors based on regional FFS expenditures calculated with the new definition of an assignable beneficiary to ensure that any implementation of these proposals does not result in unintended consequences for rural ACOs and ACOs in underserved communities.

• Changes to ACO per beneficiary per year expenditures and average risk scores under the new definition of assignable beneficiary.

• Differential impact “based on geography, ACO size and composition,” ACOs participating under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation versus ACOs under prospective assignment, and ACOs with large beneficiary populations receiving care from safety net providers.

• The impact of the proposed changes on various Shared Savings Program calculations, including minimum savings rates, performance payment limits, risk adjustment, and the determination of an ACO's status as high revenue or low revenue.

Several commenters urged CMS to provide additional analysis to assess the impact of the proposed changes at the individual ACO level, and with specificity for sub-populations of beneficiaries by demographic factors. In particular, these commenters urged CMS to provide this analysis to ensure the proposals would not have disparate impacts on ACO financial performance, and as several commenters put it, result in “artificial winners and losers.” However, the commenters did not provide specific suggestions on how to conduct this analysis.

Response: In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52448 through 52449), we described results from our analysis simulating the impact of our proposed modifications to the definition of an assignable beneficiary on the assignable population, and these results are restated in section III.G.3.a.(2)(d) of this final rule. Following publication of that proposed rule, we further simulated our proposed changes on both the assignable and ACO-assigned populations using multiple years of data. While the original analysis focused on simulating the impact of our proposed changes on the assignable population for PY 2021, in these later analyses, we simulated changes for both the assignable and ACO-assigned populations for PYs 2019 and 2021 using the set of 364 ACOs that participated in the Shared Savings Program in both of those PYs. The additional simulation also allowed us to further examine how these proposals would impact ACOs, including the expected impact of these proposals on ACO financial performance measured in terms of gross savings. Furthermore, the additional analysis using two years of data allowed us to confirm that findings from PY 2021—a year affected by the PHE for COVID-19—were not anomalous. As with the initial analysis, we simplified this additional analysis by using CYs 2019 and 2021 as the respective assignment windows for each of these PYs, which would align with the assignment window for preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. Thus, the expanded window for assignment spanned from January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2021 for CY 2021, and from January 1, 2018, through December 31, 2019 for CY 2019.

We agree with commenters that providing findings of additional analysis of the impact of the revisions to the definition of assignable beneficiary and proposed step 3 to assess financial and performance-related factors is important to illustrate the policy changes, and we remain committed to ensuring program transparency. The additional analysis we summarize in this section addresses commenters' requests for more information on the impact of the proposed changes on assignment of beneficiaries, ACO benchmarks, ACO gross savings, and ACO per capita savings and average risk scores in both a year affected by the PHE for COVID-19 and a year not affected by the PHE for COVID-19. The simulation of the impact of the proposed changes on ACO benchmarks and gross savings accounts for changes to regional adjustments and regional risk ratios as a result of the proposed step 3 and the proposed changes to the definition of an assignable beneficiary, thereby addressing the requests from commenters for additional analysis on the impact of the proposed changes on “regional factors.”

We note that commenters did not include detailed recommended specifications for analyzing differential impacts on a number of metrics or factors relevant to the Shared Savings Program. We believe our analysis based on the following factors (described in greater detail in this response) corresponds to the general categories of analysis requested by commenters: distinguishing ACOs based on their number of assigned beneficiaries as an indicator of ACO size; distinguishing ACOs based on their market share in their regional service areas; 229 distinguishing ACOs located in urban versus ACOs in rural areas based a classification system for identifying the urbanicity of the counties in which the ACO's assigned beneficiaries reside; 230 and distinguishing ACOs according to what commenters referred to as “ACO composition” (to mean the demographic factors of the ACOs' assigned beneficiaries) or share of underserved populations, according to the ACO's proportion of assigned beneficiary person years by Medicare enrollment type, share of beneficiaries with an ADI national percentile rank of 85 or greater, and share of beneficiaries with at least one month of Medicare Part D LIS enrollment. Our additional analysis examined the differential financial impact on, and possible unintended consequences for, different groups of ACOs based on their proportion of assigned beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

229 An ACO's aggregate market share is calculated as the weighted average of the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO for the performance year for each Medicare enrollment type. In calculating this weighted average, the weight applied to the share for each Medicare enrollment type is equal to the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary person years for that enrollment type.

230 For this analysis, we classified ACOs into urbanicity categories (for example, “Large Central Metropolitan,” or “Noncore”) as defined by the U.S. Census Bureau Delineation files, available at https://www.census.gov/geographies/reference-files/time-series/demo/metro-micro/delineation-files.html, and using the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) Urban-Rural Classification Scheme for Counties, available at https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data_access/urban_rural.htm, based on the urbanicity of the counties in which their assigned beneficiaries reside. We classified ACOs into the urbanicity category representing the plurality of their assigned beneficiaries.

A comparison of the simulated impact on the assignable population for PY 2019 and PY 2021 revealed similar patterns between the two years, suggesting that the PHE for COVID-19 likely did not meaningfully affect the PY 2021 simulation results shared in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule. As with PY 2021, in PY 2019 the group of added beneficiaries from the expanded window for assignment simulation were more likely to be disabled Medicare enrollees and have an ADI national percentile rank of 85 or greater, and a larger share of these beneficiaries had at least one month of Medicare Part D LIS enrollment (refer to Table 33). Additionally, for both PY 2019 and PY 2021, the group of added assignable beneficiaries in the simulation had a lower average prospective HCC risk score, lower total per capita spending in CY 2021, and higher hospice utilization when compared to the population identified using the current definition of assignable beneficiary.

We present similar results in Table 34 for the simulations of the proposed addition of step 3 to the beneficiary assignment methodology. The simulations increased the total number of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs by 2.1 percent in PY 2019 and by 2.3 percent in PY 2021. Across both PY 2019 and PY 2021, the vast majority of ACOs (95.4 percent in PY 2019 and 93.9 percent in PY 2021) observed an increase between 0 and 5 percent in their number of assigned beneficiaries. Under these simulations, no ACOs observed a decrease in size of their assigned beneficiary population. Characteristics of beneficiaries newly added to the ACO-assigned populations for PY 2019 and PY 2021 resembled those of beneficiaries newly added to the national assignable population in the analysis described in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52448 through 52449). Compared to the ACO-assigned population under the current assignment methodology, beneficiaries newly added pursuant to proposed step 3 were more likely to be disabled Medicare enrollees and have an ADI national percentile rank of 85 or greater and a larger share of these beneficiaries had at least one month of Medicare Part D LIS enrollment. This group of beneficiaries newly added to the ACO-assigned population also had a lower average prospective HCC risk score, lower total per capita spending, and higher hospice utilization rate in PY 2019 and PY 2021 when compared to the ACO-assigned population under the current assignment methodology.

Note: Percentages in the table may not sum to 100% due to rounding. Similarly, total person years assigned to an ACO under current assignment methods and the total person years added to the ACO-assigned population in the simulation may not sum to the total person years assigned to an ACO under the simulation due to rounding.

We also simulated the impact of the proposed modifications to the assignment methodology and the definition of an assignable beneficiary on ACOs' financial performance, measured in terms of gross savings (that is, benchmarks minus expenditures). To conduct this financial impact simulation, we made additional simplifying assumptions. We assumed that CY 2019 represented Benchmark Year 3 (BY3) and that CY 2021 represented PY2. We then calculated key benchmarking components to simulate ACOs' updated benchmarks and compared these updated benchmarks to ACOs' simulated PY 2021 expenditures to estimate gross savings. We then made gross savings estimates using the current assignment methodology and definition of assignable beneficiary and compared those estimates to gross savings estimates made using the proposed modifications to the beneficiary assignment methodology and definition of an assignable beneficiary.

As summarized in Table 35, on average, the simulated financial impact of the proposed modifications to the beneficiary assignment methodology and to the definition of an assignable beneficiary was relatively small. We observed slight average decreases in ACOs' per capita benchmarks that we attribute primarily to a slight decrease (1.7 percent) in the average regional adjustment. When analyzing combined impacts on ACO's benchmarks and performance year spending, we observed that average ACO per capita gross savings decreased by $4.30, or 1.3 percent, but total gross savings increased by an average $66,618, or 0.9 percent. In other words, in these illustrative analyses based on 2019 and 2021 data although the average ACO generated lower gross savings on a per capita basis, the average ACO generated greater total dollar savings due to an increase in the total number of assigned beneficiaries. Actual financial impacts from the proposed modifications to the beneficiary assignment methodology and to the definition of an assignable beneficiary, may vary based on how ACOs increase care coordination and multiple other factors. Impacts on actual gross savings calculations starting in PY2024 might be even more limited than the relatively modest impacts estimated from the simulation because the simulation compared a 2019 base year to a 2021 performance year (and corresponding lookback period) that included unusual effects of COVID-19 on utilization of primary care services.

The impacts on individual ACOs were also relatively small for a majority of ACOs. Approximately half of ACOs (49.5 percent) observed greater total gross savings under the simulation using an assignment methodology that included the proposed step 3 and revised definition of an assignable beneficiary, and the magnitude of these changes was relatively small. Approximately two-thirds of ACOs (66.8 percent) saw changes in their total gross savings that were within plus or minus 10 percent of what they observed under the current methodology; nearly half (47.3 percent) were within plus or minus 5 percent. We also found that for very few ACOs, the direction of their performance changed, from generating gross savings to observing gross losses, and vice versa. Only 3 ACOs switched from generating total gross savings to observing total gross losses, while 6 ACOs switched from generating total gross losses to observing total gross savings. The changes in performance that we observed for these ACOs was somewhat expected given that ACOs with total gross savings or losses closer to zero are especially likely to switch from generating savings to observing losses, or vice versa, because the threshold for them to do so is very low.

We also examined whether the simulated financial impact of the proposed addition of step 3 and the revised definition of assignable beneficiary differed by ACOs with different characteristics, but we did not observe any meaningful differences. For example, ACOs located in the most urban areas (classified as “Large Central Metropolitan”) observed a median impact on their total gross savings that was similar to the impact on ACOs located in the most rural areas (classified as “Noncore”). We similarly found no meaningful differences in financial impact between ACOs with different market shares in their regional service area, between ACOs with different levels of penetration across all Shared Savings Program ACOs in their regional service area, 231 between ACOs of different sizes (that is, ACOs with relatively large assigned beneficiary populations versus ACOs with relatively small populations), between ACOs with higher versus lower shares of beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, or between ACOs under prospective assignment versus preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation.

231 The penetration level across all Shared Savings Program ACOs is calculated as the weighted average of the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to any Shared Savings Program ACO for the performance year for each Medicare enrollment type.

Comparing the simulation results for low revenue ACOs and high revenue ACOs (as defined according to § 425.20), we found that high revenue ACOs observed a more positive average impact from the simulated addition of step 3 to the assignment methodology on their per capita and total gross savings (−$8.61 versus −$0.14 for per capita savings impact, and −$15,255 versus $145,835 for total savings impact for low revenue and high revenue ACOs, respectively). However, the mean difference in these impacts was small relative to the large variation in impact within both subgroups.

In summary, we found that proposed modifications to add step 3 to the beneficiary assignment methodology added a meaningful number of beneficiaries to the ACO-assigned population, and when combined with proposed revisions to the definition of an assignable beneficiary, had a relatively small impact on gross savings performance for a majority of ACOs. Furthermore, the simulated impact of these proposals did not appear to differ meaningfully between ACOs with different characteristics, as explained previously in this section, including for ACOs located in rural areas and for ACOs with higher versus lower shares of beneficiaries dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

With respect to the request from one commenter that CMS further assess the impact of the proposed changes on various Shared Savings Program calculations, including minimum savings rates, performance payment limits, risk adjustment, and the determination of an ACO's status as high revenue or low revenue, our analysis did not directly examine all of these calculations. However, we note that our findings on the impact of the proposed changes on ACOs' assigned beneficiary populations imply mostly small decreases in minimum savings rates (due to small increases in the size of ACOs' assigned populations) and slightly higher performance payment limits (due to increases in ACOs' total benchmarks related to their larger assigned beneficiary populations). While ACO participant revenue would not be affected by the proposed changes, we anticipate small increases in total assigned beneficiary expenditures (due to larger assigned beneficiary populations), which could lead to fewer ACOs being identified as high revenue ACOs. We also note that our analysis did incorporate risk adjustment when estimating the updated benchmarks used to calculate simulated gross savings under both the current and proposed assignment methodologies and definitions of assignable beneficiary. The relatively small estimated impacts on gross savings imply that the proposed changes to the assignment methodology and definition of assignable beneficiaries will have a limited impact on risk adjustment calculations.

We considered the findings from this additional analysis in our decision of whether to finalize these proposals. Because the additional analysis did not show meaningful differential impacts on ACOs among the different groups of ACOs we described previously, we did not see reason to modify or delay the proposed changes. The findings suggest it is unlikely that the proposed changes will have significant negative consequences on ACOs, and we continue to anticipate that the benefits of the proposed changes such as recognizing the clinicians that are providing high-quality primary care, expanding access to accountable care, particularly for beneficiaries in rural and other areas experiencing primary care physician shortages, and reducing the barriers for underserved beneficiaries to be assigned to ACOs, will outweigh any risk of potential negative effects.

Comment: Many commenters, including those supportive of and those opposed to the proposals to revise the definition of assignable beneficiary and add step 3 to the step-wise assignment methodology, raised concerns about CMS's ability to distinguish between non-physician practitioners who practice primary care and those who practice specialty care, resulting in the assignment of beneficiaries that is driven by specialty care provided by ACO professionals (such as after an acute event requiring specialty care), rather than being reflective of the beneficiaries' primary care relationships with the ACO. A few commenters indicated that the concerns about the lack of specialty code designations for non-physician practitioners has been an ongoing issue, and commenters worried that the proposed new step 3 would exacerbate this problem in the context of beneficiary assignment. Commenters tended to explain that these circumstances result from an increase in non-physician practitioners working in specialty practices, and the lack of specialty designations in the Medicare health care provider taxonomy code classification for these practitioners by which to identify and remove such providers from use in assignment.

Commenters further described their concerns about this dynamic. Some commenters stated that beneficiaries receiving care from non-physician practitioners working in specialty practices tend to be those beneficiaries receiving a high-cost procedure or care for an acute condition in that performance year and are not assigned to the same ACO again in future performance years, affecting the ACO's ability to coordinate the beneficiaries' care and in turn the ACO's ability to reduce expenditures below its benchmark and improve the quality of care furnished to those beneficiaries. According to one commenter, such circumstances, where an ACO is held accountable for the care furnished to a beneficiary whose care is not being coordinated by the ACO, makes it harder for participating ACOs to succeed and thus creates disincentives for new ACOs to participate in the Shared Savings Program. A few commenters suggested that the impact of this concern would be dependent on an ACO's composition and that ACOs containing large multispecialty practices or academic medical centers would experience higher rates of specialist-driven assignment related to care delivered by non-physician practitioners in these settings. One commenter, shared concerns that the proposed approach would lead to beneficiaries being assigned to their ACO due to a visit with a non-physician practitioner who is “not participating in nor understand[s] the population health objectives” crucial to the ACO's success. One commenter expressed concern about assignment of beneficiaries residing in long-term nursing facility settings. This commenter noted that non-physician practitioners provide a significant amount of wound care and behavioral health care, which affects the determination of where a beneficiary receives the plurality of their primary care services and results in beneficiaries failing to be assigned to an ACO with which they have a “primary care relationship.”

Response: After further considering existing evidence and our analysis of the population that would be newly assigned under the proposed step 3 of the assignment methodology, we do not share the commenters' concerns regarding the potential impact on assignment resulting from a lack of secondary specialty code designations for non-physician practitioners. We agree and recognize that non-physician practitioners may practice as specialty providers. However, in the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32749 through 32750) when we finalized changes to step 1 of the assignment methodology to include claims for primary care services furnished by NPs, PAs, and CNSs under step 1 of the step-wise assignment methodology, commenters noted, and we agreed, that most non-physician practitioners have been trained in primary care or in providing services in primary care settings, or both. Recent research and analysis also support this point. A 2022 survey by the American Association of Nurse Practitioners found that 88.0 percent of NPs are certified in an area of primary care and that 70.3 percent deliver primary care. 232 In addition, we performed an analysis of 2022 Medicare claims data and found that only 7 percent of primary care services identified under § 425.400(c) billed by NPs, PAs, and CNSs participating in ACOs were billed through medical groups comprised mostly (greater than 50 percent) of physicians with specialties that are not used in assigning beneficiaries to ACOs. In contrast, 93 percent were billed through either medical groups comprised mostly of primary care physicians or multi-specialty practices comprised mostly of clinicians with primary care or other specialty designations used in beneficiary assignment under § 425.402(c). Furthermore, claims-based beneficiary assignment currently is and will continue to be based on allowed charges for primary care services identified under § 425.400(c); therefore, to the extent NPs, PAs, and CNSs furnish specialty care services not included in the definition of primary care services used in assignment, such services would not be considered in assigning beneficiaries.

232 Refer to American Association of Nurse Practitioners, NP Fact Sheet (Updated November 2022), available at https://www.aanp.org/about/all-about-nps/np-fact-sheet .

Additionally, under the current assignment methodology, only a very small share of claims-based assigned beneficiaries (approximately 2.2 percent of beneficiaries assigned under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation and approximately 3.3 percent of beneficiaries assigned under prospective assignment in PY 2022) are assigned in step 2 based on the plurality of primary care services provided by specialty physicians. Because only 7 percent of primary care services billed by NPs, PAs, and CNSs were billed through medical groups comprised mostly of physicians with specialties that are not used in assigning beneficiaries to ACOs, and because specialty services that might be billed by such specialist non-physician practitioners are not included in the primary care services identified for purposes of assigning beneficiaries (under § 425.400(c), we believe it is unlikely that a significantly high proportion of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs based on the revised step-wise methodology would be assigned to ACOs based on their receipt of primary care services provided by specialist non-physician practitioners.

Many beneficiaries have an established relationship with a physician and maintain their primary care relationship with the physician's practice through subsequent visits with NPs, PAs, and CNSs. The new step 3 is designed and expected to capture beneficiaries who receive their primary care from ACOs that rely on advanced practice provider care models—that is, ACOs in which NPs, PAs, and CNSs collaborate with primary care physicians and other physicians with specialties used in assignment to manage their patients' primary care. We believe that assignment of these beneficiaries to ACOs under step 3 reflects assignment of these beneficiaries to the ACOs that primarily managed their primary care during the expanded window for assignment.

Elsewhere in our response to comments in this section of this final rule we describe our additional analysis of the proposed changes to both the assignment methodology and to the definition of an assignable beneficiary. Our analysis shows that approximately 83 percent of beneficiaries newly added to the ACO-assigned population under step 3 for PY 2019 received at least one primary care service (as defined at § 425.400(c)) from a primary care physician (as defined at § 425.20), as opposed to a physician who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c), at the same ACO in 2018 that they were assigned to for PY 2019. 233 On average, we found that those primary care physician visits accounted for a majority of allowed charges for all primary care services received by those beneficiaries in 2018. This finding further supported the notion that the NPs, PAs, and CNSs seen by new step 3-assigned beneficiaries in the assignment window at the ACO were an extension of a primary care relationship between the beneficiaries and primary care physicians in the ACO in the prior year, suggesting further that these NPs, PAs, and CNSs are serving a primary care rather than specialty function. In other words, the ACO that was assigned a beneficiary in step 3 for PY 2019 was the ACO which included the primary care physicians who most often provided the beneficiary's primary care in the 12-months preceding the assignment window, and, during the assignment window, the beneficiary continued to receive primary care services from non-physician practitioners participating in the ACO.

233 We conducted this additional sub-analysis on one of the PYs in the simulation by examining the specific types of practitioners seen by beneficiaries newly added to the ACO assigned population with the step 3 simulation. For this sub-analysis, we selected PY 2019 to avoid any possible confounding effects of the PHE for COVID-19. The remaining 17 percent received at least one primary care service, as defined at § 425.400(c), from a physician who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c) and no primary care services from a primary care physician.

We also note that beneficiaries assigned in step 3 must have received a primary care service from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c) during the expanded window for assignment. As we noted in the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32750), we expect that specialist physicians often take the role of primary care physicians in the overall treatment of beneficiaries with certain chronic conditions, and such patterns are captured in step 2 in the current assignment methodology. As explained previously in this section, our analysis suggests that non-physician practitioners functioning as specialists represent a minority of non-physician practitioners. However, consistent with that analysis and similar to primary care services furnished by specialist physicians that are captured by step 2, to the extent that primary care services are furnished by specialist non-physician practitioners, we believe that those non-physician specialists would likely be acting as primary care providers and considering the primary care they provide as part of our assignment methodology would be appropriate for identifying the ACO professionals most responsible for a beneficiary's primary care. As a result, we believe that the proposed step 3 reflects an improved approach for capturing existing primary care relationships that include non-physician practitioners.

We acknowledge commenters' concern that some ACOs with large multispecialty practices may have higher likelihood of having a beneficiary assigned based on services furnished by specialty-focused non-physician practitioners. However, we do not believe this concern outweighs the benefits of our proposal. As our analysis of 2022 Medicare claims data suggests and we explain elsewhere in this section of this final rule, we do not believe that a significant percentage of beneficiaries will be assigned to ACOs pursuant to step 3 based on their receipt of primary care services provided by specialist non-physician practitioners. Step 3 will apply to a very limited, specific population of beneficiaries, namely beneficiaries who, during the assignment window, did not have a visit with a primary care physician or a physician with one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c) who is an ACO professional in the ACO. Furthermore, as explained previously in this section, our analysis of the expected impact of the new step 3 indicates that, during the expanded window for assignment, the vast majority of beneficiaries newly added to the ACO-assigned population under step 3 will likely have received one or more primary care services from a primary care physician (as defined at § 425.20), as opposed to a physician who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c), who is participating in the ACO to which the beneficiary is assigned. In addition, our analysis suggests a high likelihood that those primary care physician visits will account for most of the beneficiaries' primary care services furnished in the 12 months preceding the assignment window and that those beneficiaries will receive primary care services from non-physician practitioners participating in the ACO during the assignment window.

We are limited in the extent to which we can address the commenter's concern about assignment of beneficiaries residing in long-term nursing facilities as a result of services for wound care or behavioral health care because the commenter did not provide sufficient information that we can use to identify the services about which they are concerned (such as the related HCPCS and CPT codes included in the definition of primary care services). Generally, we believe Medicare FFS beneficiaries residing in long-term care facilities, among other beneficiaries added to ACOs' assigned populations in step 3, would benefit from better care coordination through ACOs. In addition, as explained previously in this section, we do not believe that a significant percentage of beneficiaries will be assigned to ACOs pursuant to step 3 based on their receipt of primary care services provided by specialist non-physician practitioners, and we continue to anticipate that the benefits of the proposed changes will outweigh any risk of potential negative effects.

Comment: Among comments raising concerns about distinguishing between non-physician practitioners working as specialists from those working in primary care, most asked for a more refined approach and offered various suggestions for distinguishing between these different types of providers. As explained by some commenters, these suggestions were oriented towards ensuring that non-physician practitioners who deliver primary care, as opposed to specialty care, play a prominent role in ACO assignment. One commenter specifically noted that changes accounting for the specialty of non-physician practitioners used in assignment should apply to both step 1 and the proposed new step 3 of the assignment process.

One suggestion common across multiple comments was for CMS to consider developing a new taxonomy to identify primary care or specialty care focused non-physician practitioners and to update the Provider Enrollment, Chain, and Ownership System (PECOS) to incorporate this new taxonomy. A few commenters suggested that to start this process, CMS could collect this information as an optional field in the Medicare provider enrollment application. One commenter stated an alternative option could be to expand the current specialty codes utilized in determining assignment, such as through rulemaking or guidance, because the current codes are too generic to differentiate between NPs, PAs, and CNSs that primarily practice primary care versus specialty care. Another commenter urged CMS to consider using patient relationship codes established under MACRA. 234

234 For more information on MACRA patient relationship codes, refer to https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-Instruments/Value-Based-Programs/MACRA-MIPS-and-APMs/Patient-Relationship-Categories-and-Codes-webinar-FAQ.PDF .

Several commenters suggested revising Shared Savings Program policies to permit participation by ACOs comprised of ACO participants identified by a combination of NPIs and Medicare-enrolled billing TINs through which one or more ACO providers/suppliers bill Medicare. One commenter stated that such a change would enable the integration of specialists into the Shared Savings Program because it would allow ACOs to “segment primary care providers and specialist providers,” but did not provide additional details on what they meant by segmenting providers and how it would enable that integration. Similarly, some commenters requested that, without means to distinguish non-physician practitioners who practice primary care from those who practice specialty care, ACOs be permitted to identify specialty-focused practitioners so that CMS could ensure that services furnished by those practitioners to beneficiaries would not be considered as part of beneficiary assignment.

One commenter asked CMS to provide clarification on guardrails CMS intends to implement to ensure that a beneficiary with a complex condition being managed by a specialist outside the ACO and for whom that specialty care comprises the bulk of the beneficiary's care is not assigned to an ACO based on the services by NPs or PAs who are ACO professionals in that ACO.

More generally, some commenters noted that ACOs struggle to maintain assignment year-to-year for beneficiaries assigned “through specialists,” and some suggested that CMS should explore strategies to support ACOs in “leveraging specialty-driven assignment” to develop longitudinal primary care relationships with these beneficiaries, but these commenters did not clarify whether the specialists they are concerned about include non-physician practitioners and did not provide specific suggestions on what these strategies could be.

Other commenters stated that CMS needs to conduct in-depth analysis to ensure more patients are not assigned to ACOs as a result of care provided by “specialists” under the proposed changes. Some commenters recommended this analysis include differences in risk scores and costs for beneficiaries assigned to ACOs as a result of care provided by specialists to inform future policy development, but commenters did not specify whether specialists in this analysis would include non-physician practitioners.

Response: At this time, we will not establish additional procedures to distinguish between non-physician practitioners working as specialists from those working in primary care for purposes of step 3, or as some commenters requested, for step 1 of the assignment process. In the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32749 through 32750) when we finalized changes to step 1 of the assignment methodology to include claims for primary care services furnished by NPs, PAs, and CNSs under step 1 of the assignment process, some commenters suggested that CMS take additional steps to assure that the NPs, PAs and CNSs considered under step 1 are truly primary care providers in order to better assure accurate assignment of beneficiaries to ACOs based on beneficiaries' receipt of primary care services. In our response to these commenters in the June 2015 final rule, we stated that at that time we would not establish special procedures to determine whether NPs, PAs, and CNSs are performing primary care and not specialty care. We continue to believe that most non-physician practitioners have been trained in primary care or provide services in primary care settings or both. In addition, as explained previously in this section, our analysis suggests that non-physician practitioners functioning as specialists represent a minority of non-physician practitioners and we do not believe that a significant percentage of beneficiaries will be assigned to ACOs pursuant to step 3 based on their receipt of primary care services provided by specialist non-physician practitioners. Furthermore, similar special procedures to distinguish between practitioners working as specialists from those working in primary care have posed significant challenges in the past when applied in the context of RHC and FQHC services. As we explained in the CY 2018 PFS final rule that removed the attestation requirement for RHC and FQHC participants (82 FR 53210), the procedure that relied on ACOs to report and identify all individual physicians that directly provide primary care services within ACO participant RHCs and FQHCs for purposes of beneficiary assignment is prone to error and can create significant operational burdens.

We decline to adopt the suggestions by commenters to further differentiate use of claims billed as a primary care service by non-physician practitioners in assignment through changes to the Medicare provider specialty code taxonomy. Currently, Medicare claims do not contain the necessary information to distinguish services by non-physician practitioners provided in a primary care versus specialty capacity. Creating new codes or modifying the Medicare provider specialty code taxonomy would require review and approval through rulemaking, and include consideration of several factors such as: whether the specialty has the authority to bill Medicare and if the specialty treats a significant volume of the Medicare population; evidence that the practice pattern of the specialty is markedly different from that of other specialties; evidence of any specialized training and/or certification required by the providers; credentialing or other recognition by another organization, such as the American Board of Medical Specialties; and the availability of a corresponding Healthcare Provider Taxonomy Code.

We also decline to change the Shared Savings Program policies to permit participation by ACOs comprised of ACO participants identified by a combination of NPIs and Medicare-enrolled billing TINs through which one or more ACO providers/suppliers bill Medicare, instead of requiring that all ACO participants that comprise an ACO be identified by a Medicare-enrolled TIN through which one or more ACO providers/suppliers bill Medicare. Commenters requesting we make such a change go beyond the scope of our proposals described in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule. However, we noted that as we stated in previous rulemaking (80 FR 67874), we believe that defining ACO participants to include all NPIs that have reassigned their billing rights to the ACO participant TIN is a means to allow the ACO's redesigned care processes to more broadly reach all Medicare FFS beneficiaries that may receive care from ACO participants and provides incentives for lower-performing providers within an ACO participant TIN to improve. We also continue to have concerns about ACOs selecting only the highest-performing providers within a practice to be part of the ACO while less efficient and less effective providers are not part of the ACO, because this structure could have negative implications for patients seen by the ACO participant and for the Medicare Trust Funds. Therefore, we continue to believe that maintaining the definition of ACO participant at the TIN level continues to be an effective approach in achieving the program's goals of improved care and reduced expenditures, for Medicare FFS beneficiaries more broadly.

We also decline to incorporate patient relationship categories and codes established under MACRA into our assignment methodology at this time. These HCPCS Level II modifier codes are currently being tested for their potential use in the attribution methodology for the cost measures being used under MACRA. Reporting is currently voluntary to help collect data for testing and educate clinicians and stakeholders about the proper use of these code modifiers. In addition, given that the codes are based on categories of patient relationships, it is not clear how they could be incorporated into the claims-based assignment process. Use of patient relationship codes might require structural changes to the assignment process that were not contemplated in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule. Absent data on how they may impact beneficiary assignment in the Shared Savings Program, it is not clear how we might use the patient relationship codes in beneficiary assignment or what the effect of that use may be. Possible use of these patient relationship codes in beneficiary ACO assignment would require additional investigation and request for comments.

Finally, we decline to adopt a policy to ensure that beneficiaries are not assigned to an ACO due to services provided by NPs, PAs, and CNSs if the majority of the beneficiary's care is provided by a specialist physician outside the ACO. We note that under step 3, a beneficiary who received primary care from an NP, PA, or CNS participating in an ACO but received the plurality of their primary care during the expanded window for assignment from a specialist physician outside of a given ACO would not be assigned to that ACO.

Comment: Several commenters expressed support for the proposed definition of the expanded window for assignment, that is, the 24-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO, or to identify assignable beneficiaries, or both that includes the applicable 12-month assignment window and the preceding 12 months. Some commenters explained their belief that the proposed approach would appropriately align the expanded window for assignment with the different 12-month assignment windows for ACOs under prospective assignment versus preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. Another commenter explained that the proposed definition of the expanded window for assignment would better account for beneficiaries who receive primary care from NPs, PAs, and CNSs.

One commenter encouraged CMS to consider revising the expanded window for assignment to 36 months, to align the window with the CMS definition of an established patient relationship. 235 The commenter explained that this is an already-defined timeframe and that using such an approach could assist with increasing beneficiary participation in an ACO.

235 CMS defines an established patient as a person who receives professional services from the physician, non-physician practitioner, or another physician of the same specialty who belongs to the same group practice within the previous 3 years. Refer to CMS, Evaluation and Management Services Guide, MLN Booklet (MLN006764 August 2023), pg. 17, available at https://www.cms.gov/outreach-and-education/medicare-learning-network-mln/mlnproducts/downloads/eval-mgmt-serv-guide-icn006764.pdf .

Response: We appreciate the commenters' support for the proposed definition of the expanded window for assignment, which we are finalizing as proposed. We agree with the commenter's sentiment that a 24-month expanded window for assignment will better account for beneficiaries who receive primary care from NPs, PAs and CNSs.

We are unsure how to interpret the statements from some commenters that the proposed approach would appropriately align the expanded window for assignment with the different 12-month assignment windows for ACOs under prospective assignment versus preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. As we explained in the proposed rule (88 FR 52443), the expanded window for assignment for prospective assignment will differ from the expanded window for assignment for preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. The expanded window for assignment to be defined at § 425.20 will mean the 24-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO, or to identify assignable beneficiaries, or both, that includes the applicable 12-month assignment window (as defined under § 425.20) and the preceding 12 months. For example, for a calendar year assignment window that runs from January 1, 2025, through December 31, 2025, the expanded window for assignment would run from January 1, 2024, through December 31, 2025. For an offset assignment window that runs from October 1, 2023, through September 30, 2024, the expanded window for assignment would run from October 1, 2022, through September 30, 2024.

At this time, we decline to adopt the commenter's suggestion to use a 36-month expanded window for assignment, but will continue to monitor beneficiary assignment to ACOs in the future and consider proposing additional changes, as appropriate. As we described in section III.G.3.a.(2)(a) of this final rule, we believe that a 24-month expanded window for assignment, as opposed to a longer period, would prioritize primary care services that were provided more recently. We believe that primary care services furnished by nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and clinical nurse specialists during the 12-month assignment window could reflect their work in clinical teams in collaboration with and under the supervision of physicians, and thereby represent a continuation of the beneficiary's primary care relationship with a physician from the previous year. Furthermore, use of a 24-month expanded window for assignment builds on experience we have gained and lessons learned from testing Medicare ACO initiatives by the Innovation Center, specifically from the use of a two-year beneficiary alignment period in the ACO REACH Model and the NGACO Model.

Comment: Some commenters expressed concerns that the expanded window for assignment might inappropriately assign beneficiaries based on their receipt of services from practitioners who no longer serve as their primary care provider. One commenter urged CMS not to finalize the expanded window over concerns about beneficiaries who might reside in multiple states for different parts of the year.

Response: As with the existing step-wise methodology, the revised approach would determine assignment based on the plurality of allowed charges for primary care services furnished to the beneficiary during the assignment window or expanded window for assignment, regardless of whether the beneficiary may live in different geographic areas at different points in time in the assignment window or expanded window for assignment. In the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32745), we reported results of an analysis we conducted that indicated that beneficiary relocation out of an ACO's service area impacted only a very small number of beneficiaries within an ACO's assigned population, and these beneficiaries did not represent a significant portion of the ACO's assigned population. We do not expect that expanding the window for assignment to 24 months would meaningfully change this outcome. In addition, we believe that beneficiaries who generally live in multiple geographic areas over the course of a year may be likely to follow a similar pattern each calendar year of changing locations and obtaining primary care services. We do not expect a 12-month change in the length of the assignment window to significantly change how those beneficiaries are assigned because we believe they generally would maintain that same pattern across a 24-month window. We reiterate our belief, explained in the June 2015 final rule, that continuing to include those beneficiaries who have not permanently moved, but who otherwise live in two or more geographic locations during the year, provides an excellent opportunity for ACOs to make sure the care for such beneficiaries is coordinated.

Comment: A few commenters, addressing our statement in the proposed rule that, as with the current step-wise methodology, under the proposed step 3 a beneficiary prospectively assigned to an ACO for a benchmark or performance year would not be assigned to another ACO under prospective assignment or preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, even if the other ACO provides the plurality of the beneficiary's primary care services during the relevant benchmark or performance year, asked that CMS monitor for any effects that the precedence of prospective assignment may have on smaller ACOs subject to preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, to which beneficiaries prospectively assigned to another ACO through step-wise assignment, including the proposed step 3, could not be assigned.

One commenter described concerns that the expanded window for assignment would increase the number of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs based on a timeframe that “is not most reflective of the primary care physician relationship,” with a disproportionately negative impact on ACOs operating under prospective assignment. The commenter explained that under prospective assignment, beneficiaries who have not seen a physician who is an ACO professional in the applicable 12-month assignment window but are assigned to an ACO based on the expanded window for assignment will be “locked in” to that ACO for the performance year; however, under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation many of these beneficiaries would “drop” from the assignment list over the course of the performance year as new claims and services are considered in assignment. The commenter further cited concerns that preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation serves as a means for ACOs to “game” assignment by encouraging higher-cost beneficiaries to receive care from providers that do not bill under an ACO participant TIN in the ACO, and focusing on ensuring lower-cost beneficiaries remain assigned to the ACO. The commenter suggested that CMS make assignment using the expanded window for assignment an annual option for ACOs to elect along with the choice of preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation or prospective assignment. In the alternative, if the expanded window for assignment is used in our methodology for assigning beneficiaries to all ACOs, the commenter suggested that CMS remove the option for ACOs to select preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation and require all ACOs to participate under prospective assignment.

Response: In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52445), we acknowledged that there may be a small share of beneficiaries who would be prospectively assigned to an ACO under the proposed step 3 for prospective assignment that differs from the ACO the beneficiary is currently assigned to under steps 1 or 2 under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. We noted that this precedence of prospective assignment follows the current assignment methodology, which currently assigns beneficiaries via steps 1 and 2 of prospective assignment to an ACO that may be different than the ACO to which the beneficiary would have been assigned via steps 1 or 2 if assigned to an ACO under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation. For the average ACO under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, the share of assigned beneficiaries affected by this precedence of prospective assignment has historically been very small, approximately 1.3 percent from 2018 through 2021. We anticipate monitoring the impact of the use of step 3 on the size of ACOs' assigned populations, including for differences in impact based on an ACO's selection of assignment methodology, and on smaller ACOs, including with respect to ACOs' ability to meet the requirement to have at least 5,000 assigned beneficiaries under § 425.110(a).

We also believe that the benefits of the proposed changes to the step-wise methodology outweigh the risk of prospectively assigning a beneficiary in step 3 to an ACO based on a physician visit and the beneficiary's use of primary care services during the expanded window for assignment instead of to another ACO to which the beneficiary would have been assigned under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation based on the plurality of allowed charges for primary care services furnished to the beneficiary during the benchmark or performance year. Overall, we expect that a very small proportion of beneficiaries assigned in step 3 will fall into this category, while the vast majority of beneficiaries assigned in step 3 will be beneficiaries who would not have otherwise been brought into an accountable care relationship.

Additionally, we do not share the concerns of the commenter who stated that the expanded window for assignment would increase the number of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs based on a timeframe that “is not most reflective of the primary care physician relationship,” with a disproportionately negative impact on ACOs operating under prospective assignment. We refer the commenter to the additional analysis that we describe elsewhere in this section of this final rule, indicating that, during the expanded window for assignment, a large majority of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs pursuant to step 3 will have received one or more primary care services from a primary care physicians (as defined at § 425.20), as opposed to a physician who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c), who is participating in the ACO to which the beneficiary is assigned. Further, we note that ACOs have the option to elect prospective assignment or preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation on an annual basis. ACOs that share the concern of the commenter could elect the methodology they find most appropriate for their ACO. With respect to the concern over gaming beneficiary assignment by encouraging higher-cost beneficiaries to receive care from providers and suppliers that do not bill under an ACO participant TIN in the ACO, we do not expect step 3 to incentivize or enable an ACO to engage in this type of behavior to a greater degree than the current step-wise methodology does, and we remind the commenter that we monitor ACO avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries pursuant to the regulations at § 425.316(b).

We decline to adopt the commenter's suggestion to allow ACOs the option to elect whether to use the expanded window for assignment for purposes of assignment each year. The proposed expanded window for assignment would apply to both the step 3 in the assignment methodology and to the definition of an assignable beneficiary. We believe it is necessary to maintain symmetry between the step-wise assignment methodology and the definition of an assignable beneficiary. Applying the expanded window for assignment in the step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology but not to the definition of an assignable beneficiary, or vice-versa, could create programmatic inconsistencies and may result in differential changes in average per capita expenditures and risk scores, resulting in inaccurate benchmarks due to distortions to benchmark trend and update factors that are based on changes in expenditures for the national assignable population and in the risk-adjusted expenditures for the population of assignable beneficiaries in an ACO's regional service area. Elsewhere in this section of this final rule, we explain that numerous aspects of the Shared Savings Program rely on the ACO-assigned population and the assignable population (see sections III.G.3.a.(2)(b) and (c) of this final rule). That is, various aspects of the program's benchmarking and financial methodology applicable to all ACOs, such as in the calculation of the regional adjustment and in the calculation of regional service area expenditures, will be determined in part by the national and regional populations of assignable beneficiaries identified through use of an expanded window for assignment. We also decline to adopt an alternative that would allow ACOs the option to elect whether to use the expanded window for assignment for both assignment and establishing the assignable population. It would be operationally complex and unduly burdensome for CMS to create multiple assignable beneficiary populations for different ACOs using different definitions of an assignable beneficiary. It would also be operationally complex and unduly burdensome to perform beneficiary assignment using step 3 for some ACOs but not for others. Among other operational concerns, with each distinct beneficiary assignment methodology, we would need to apply precedence rules for handling cases when a given beneficiary is assigned to different ACOs under different methodologies. Doing so would create excessive complexity in administering the program and excessive complexity for ACOs participating in the program to review and track.

We decline to adopt the suggestion by the commenter to require ACOs to participate under prospective assignment. Section 1899(c)(2)(A) of the Act, as amended by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, provides that the Secretary shall permit ACOs to choose to have Medicare FFS beneficiaries assigned prospectively, rather than retrospectively. Consistent with section 1899(c)(2)(A) of the Act, we offer all Shared Savings Program ACOs in agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years the opportunity to select their beneficiary assignment methodology annually.

Comment: One commenter, who supported the proposed approach, requested CMS clarify in the final rule that an eligible beneficiary who received at least one primary care service with an NP, PA, or CNS participating in the ACO during the applicable 12-month assignment window would be considered an assignable beneficiary in certain cases. Specifically, the commenter described the following cases:

• The primary care physician, who used to be an ACO professional in the ACO and provided the primary care service to the beneficiary in the 12 months preceding the assignment window, is no longer billing under the TIN of an ACO participant during the applicable 12-month assignment window;

• The ACO participant, which was the entity whose TIN the primary care physician was billing under when they provided the primary care service to the beneficiary in the 12-month period preceding the assignment window, is no longer participating in the Shared Savings Program ACO during the applicable 12-month assignment window; and

• The physician, an ACO professional in the ACO who had one of the primary specialty designations identified in § 425.402(c) and provided the primary care service to the beneficiary in the 12 months preceding the assignment window, changed specialty designation in the PECOS and no longer had one of the primary specialty designations identified in § 425.402(c) during the applicable 12-month assignment window.

Response: We interpret this commenter's question as requesting clarification of whether a beneficiary would be considered assignable to the ACO. We note that to actually be assigned, the beneficiary would have to have received the plurality of their primary care services from ACO professionals participating in the ACO during the applicable 12-month assignment window for steps 1 and 2 or during the expanded window for assignment for step 3. In the first case, the beneficiary would be considered assignable because the Shared Savings Program recognizes primary care services at the ACO-TIN level, and not at the ACO-TIN-NPI (that is, practitioner) level. In the second case, if the TIN was removed from the ACO's ACO participant list for the performance year that beneficiary assignment is being conducted for, then the beneficiary would not be assignable to the ACO on the basis of primary care services billed under that TIN. In the third case, the beneficiary would be assignable if the physician's specialty on the claim indicates a primary care physician or one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c). Note that CMS does not use PECOS to determine physician specialty, but rather uses the physician's specialty listed on the claim record.

Comment: One commenter, which supported the inclusion of step 3, explained that it had conducted an analysis and found that expanding the window for assignment and adding step 3 had the desired effect of expanding the number of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs. Additionally, the commenter stated that they found that the proposed step 3 “led to assignment in approximately 90 percent of the cases where the beneficiary went from ineligible to eligible under the policy.” The commenter considered the effect of the policy to be a substantial improvement.

Response: We do not have sufficient information about the commenter's analysis to fully address the commenter's statement. However, we do agree with the commenter that the inclusion of a step 3 would increase the number of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs on average. In the analysis we presented in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52448 through 52449), we found that the proposed policies added 762,156 newly assignable beneficiaries for PY 2021, growing the national assignable population by about 2.9 percent. Elsewhere in this section of this final rule, we describe the additional simulations we conducted on the proposed step 3 in the beneficiary assignment methodology, which showed that step 3 would have increased the total number of beneficiaries assigned to ACOs by 2.1 percent in PY 2019 and by 2.3 percent in PY 2021.

Comment: One commenter suggested that CMS also revise the existing definition of “assignable beneficiary” under § 425.20 using a similar approach as the proposed step 3.

Response: We believe the commenter may have misunderstood the proposal. We proposed to modify the definition of “assignable beneficiary” (described in section III.G.3.a.(2)(c). of this final rule) to include use of an expanded window for assignment to identify additional beneficiaries to include in the assignable population and to be consistent with the use of an expanded window for assignment under a new step 3 in the claims-based assignment process (described in section III.G.3.a.(2)(b). of this final rule). We proposed to add a new definition of “Expanded window for assignment” in § 425.20 to mean the 24-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO, or to identify assignable beneficiaries, or both that includes the applicable 12-month assignment window (as defined under § 425.20) and the preceding 12 months. See also, section III.G.3.a.(2)(a) of this final rule in which we provide an overview of the proposed revisions to incorporate use of an expanded window for assignment. We proposed that these changes would be effective for the performance year beginning on January 1, 2025, and subsequent performance years.

Comment: Some commenters expressed concerns that the Shared Savings Program's risk adjustment and benchmarking methodologies would not adequately account for complex and high-needs beneficiaries newly assigned to ACOs under the proposed modifications to the step-wise assignment methodology and the definition of an assignable beneficiary. Some of these commenters suggested the potential need for modifications to the risk adjustment and benchmarking methodologies to mitigate any adverse effects on ACOs that may result from the inclusion of these beneficiaries in their assigned beneficiary populations.

One commenter pointed to concerns about the adequacy of the cap on ACO risk score growth in the context of CMS' proposed step 3 that will assign more underserved individuals who may have complex conditions that are not properly diagnosed to Shared Savings Program ACOs. The commenter explained that these individuals typically have not had an established, stable primary care relationship, and as a result, their risk scores are likely to be unreliable. Once assigned to a Shared Savings Program ACO, these beneficiaries' conditions will be diagnosed and they will begin receiving treatment, which will raise the ACO's per capita costs. However, due to CMS' policy of capping HCC score growth at 3 percent plus changes in demographics, risk scores will not increase to reflect these changes. As a result, according to the commenter, ACOs that are assigned more complex, historically underserved beneficiaries through step 3 in the assignment methodology will experience losses and may be forced to stop participating in the Shared Savings Program.

Some commenters urged CMS to conduct further analysis on the impact of the proposed step 3 and proposed changes to the definition of an assignable beneficiary to determine if modifications to the risk adjustment and benchmarking methodologies are needed to address the effects of adding potentially higher cost and more complex patients to the ACO-assigned and national assignable populations. A few commenters suggested that CMS analyze the distribution of assignable beneficiaries to help determine the need for updates to the risk adjustment and benchmarking methodologies. Another commenter asked for additional data on the impact of the proposed step 3 on ACOs in rural and other different geographic regions in connection with regional trend factors used to establish and update the benchmark. This commenter also stated that CMS should ensure that the addition of step 3 to the assignment methodology would not harm any ACO, indicating that ACOs that are adversely affected would likely exit the program. Another commenter recommended adjusting beneficiaries' risk scores to account for the addition to the assigned beneficiary population of a significant number of patients for whom acuity has not been adequately captured, for example, by assigning a floor on the average risk score, such as 1.0, to avoid unintended consequences. Another commenter similarly requested that CMS make additional risk adjustment or benchmarking changes to mitigate potential negative impacts to ACOs from the inclusion of more complex and high-needs beneficiaries in the expanded ACO-assigned population. This commenter also suggested a more gradual transition of the proposed changes during the initial performance years in order to smooth potential effects and asked that CMS monitor for unintended consequences and have a plan for addressing any unintended consequences in a timely and responsive manner. Several commenters specified that CMS should investigate the impacts of specialty-driven assignment, including differences in risk scores and costs for beneficiaries assigned as a result of care provided by specialists, but the commenters did not specify whether specialists in this analysis should include non-physician practitioners. If the data show that these beneficiaries have higher risk scores and higher costs, the commenters suggested that CMS consider addressing these factors through changes to the risk adjustment and benchmarking policies.

Response: In responding to comments elsewhere in this section of this final rule, we describe the results of additional simulations we have conducted on the impact of the proposed changes to the assignment methodology and to the definition of an assignable beneficiary. As part of those simulations, we examined the expected impact of the proposed changes on ACO financial performance.

We believe that the additional simulations described in this final rule demonstrate that any downward effects on the average ACO's historical and updated benchmarks as a result of changes in the risk profile of its beneficiary population or the assignable population in the ACO's regional service area are offset by an average increase in the number of beneficiaries assigned to the ACO, allowing the ACO the opportunity to earn a larger shared savings payment. Our findings suggest that the risk ratios used to adjust an ACO's historical benchmark will not be adversely affected by the proposed changes because we would apply the proposed changes when determining assignment for the benchmark years, as well as the performance year. Furthermore, the findings from our simulations suggest that the proposed changes to the assignment methodology and the definition of assignable beneficiary are unlikely to result in adverse impacts on risk adjustment between the ACO's assigned beneficiary population and the ACO's regional service area. Under these simulations, we found that the characteristics of beneficiaries newly added to the ACO-assigned population for PY 2021 resembled those of beneficiaries newly added to the national assignable population in the analysis described in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52443).

Under the methodology for capping ACO risk score growth that was finalized for agreement periods starting on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69932 through 69946), we will use prospective HCC risk scores to adjust the historical benchmark for changes in severity and case mix for all assigned beneficiaries between BY3 and the performance year, with positive adjustments subject to a cap equal to the ACO's aggregate growth in demographic risk scores between BY3 and the performance year plus 3 percentage points (herein referred to as the “aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap”). When we finalized the aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap in the CY 2023 final rule (87 FR 69940), we acknowledged that the policy balanced competing concerns between the need to allow for some upward growth in prospective HCC risk scores between the benchmark period and the performance year and the concern that those risk scores, in general, are susceptible to coding initiatives. Specifically, we stated our belief that the policy we were finalizing would be protective of the Trust Funds by limiting incentives for coding intensity as it would retain the 3 percent cap on growth in prospective HCC risk scores after accounting for all changes in demographic risk scores for the ACO's overall assigned beneficiary population, while also allowing for more significant changes in prospective HCC risk scores for certain enrollment types with smaller numbers of assigned beneficiaries and for potentially higher benchmarks than the current risk adjustment methodology for ACOs that care for larger proportions of high risk beneficiaries in the aged/dual eligible, disabled, and ESRD enrollment types. Additionally, as described in section III.G.4.b of this final rule, we are finalizing the proposal to cap regional service area risk score growth for symmetry with the cap on ACO risk score growth, which our modeling suggests will be advantageous to ACOs that see greater risk score growth in their regional service area.

We have not examined differences in the beneficiaries assigned as result of care provided by specialists versus primary care practitioners in connection with the costs and risk scores. However, as we noted elsewhere in this section of this final rule, our analysis suggests that assignment of these beneficiaries to ACOs in step 3 reflects assignment of these beneficiaries based on the ACOs that primarily managed their primary care during the expanded window for assignment. Additionally, our analysis shows that the proposed revision to the definition of assignable beneficiary and the addition of a new step 3 in the assignment methodology would lead the average ACO's total gross savings to increase.

Comment: Some commenters addressed the effective date of the proposed changes to the assignment methodology and the identification of the assignable beneficiary population. A few commenters requested that the proposed changes be finalized to apply beginning with PY 2024. Another commenter urged CMS to allow currently participating ACOs to elect to have beneficiaries assigned to them only under the current assignment methodology until the start of a new agreement period, given their concern that the proposed approach would exacerbate “ongoing challenges of specialty attribution.” One commenter requested that CMS share ACO-specific modeling and analysis of the impact of the expanded window for assignment and the proposed revisions to the assignment methodology with sufficient time for review prior to signing a participation agreement for entering an agreement period in the Shared Savings Program beginning on January 1, 2025.

Response: We decline to adopt the commenters' recommendations to implement the proposed changes to the assignment methodology and the definition of assignable beneficiary starting in PY 2024. In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (refer to section III.G.3.a.(2)(e) of this final rule), we set forth reasons why we would not be able to apply the expanded window for assignment and revised step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology for the performance year starting on January 1, 2024. We explained that consistent with how we have implemented previous changes to the Shared Savings Program assignment methodology, we would use the new methodology each time assignment is determined for a given benchmark or performance year and, as applicable, to determine the eligibility of ACOs applying to enter into or renew participation in the Shared Savings Program. For example, applicant eligibility for PY 2024 will be determined during CY 2023. Additionally, we anticipated that the proposed revised approach, if finalized, would require significant operational changes to the Shared Savings Program assignment methodology, which would take time to prepare in advance of initial use of the approach during the application process. In light of these factors, we continue to believe there is insufficient time to apply the expanded window for assignment and revised step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology for the performance year starting on January 1, 2024.

We agree with the feedback of commenters in response to our proposals, as described elsewhere in this section of this final rule, that ACOs and other interested parties need time to evaluate the impact of the proposed revised assignment methodology, including the new step 3, and the revised definition of assignable beneficiary, in advance of the start of PY 2025. In response to the commenter who requested that CMS share ACO-specific modeling and analysis of the impact of the expanded window for assignment and the proposed revisions to the assignment methodology with sufficient time for review prior to signing a participation agreement for entering an agreement period in the Shared Savings Program beginning on January 1, 2025, we note that elsewhere in our response to comments in this section of this final rule, and in the Regulatory Impact Analysis (see section VI.E.10. of this final rule), we describe additional analysis we have undertaken to estimate the impact of these proposals on ACOs, including on their financial performance and assigned beneficiary populations. We also provide ACOs with an estimate of their total number of assigned beneficiaries during the application cycle which the ACO can review prior to signing a participation agreement for entering a new agreement period.

We also decline to adopt an alternative approach whereby currently participating ACOs could elect to have beneficiaries assigned to them only under the current assignment methodology until those ACOs enter a new agreement period on or after January 1, 2025. The Shared Savings Program's longstanding approach is to implement changes to the assignment methodology on a performance year basis, and as we describe elsewhere in section III.G.3.a.(2)(e) of this final rule, we believe it is necessary to maintain symmetry between the assignment methodology and the definition of an assignable beneficiary to avoid programmatic inconsistencies that may result in inaccurate benchmarks. Furthermore, we have particular concern about allowing ACOs to “opt in” to certain policies that may affect updates and adjustments to their benchmark within an agreement period, as this would create an opportunity for selective behavior without the counterbalance of benchmark rebasing and would introduce significant operational complexity.

Comment: One commenter generally expressed its belief that the “gold standard” for assignment is always voluntary, prospective patient attribution, which both empowers patients by placing them at the center of their healthcare decision making and helps providers proactively manage care for the patients they know they are responsible for.

Response: We re-emphasize, as described in the background for our proposals in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (see section III.G.3.a.(1) of this final rule), that assignment for purposes of the Shared Savings Program in no way implies any limits, restrictions, or diminishment of the rights of Medicare FFS beneficiaries to exercise freedom of choice in the physicians and other health care practitioners from whom they receive covered services. To the extent that the commenter may have been referencing the non-claims-based process for voluntary alignment that applies to all Shared Savings Program ACOs and is used to supplement claims-based assignment (as specified in § 425.402(e)), we reiterate that the proposed changes would not change the fact that beneficiary voluntary alignment supersedes claims-based assignment.

Comment: A few commenters suggested changes to increase the extent to which assignment may be based upon services by non-physician practitioners. Specifically, a few commenters suggested that CMS exercise the waiver authority under section 1899(f) of the Act to waive the statutory requirement under section 1899(c)(1)(A) of the Act that beneficiaries be assigned to an ACO based on their use of primary care services furnished by physicians participating in the ACO, which is the basis for the assignment methodology's pre-step requirement. These commenters suggested that CMS allow beneficiaries to be assigned based on their receipt of primary care services provided by an NP, PA, or CNS who is an ACO professional. One commenter urged CMS to work with Congress to remove the physician-centric assignment language in section 1899 of the Act, a change which the commenter noted they believe would allow for simplification of the beneficiary assignment process.

Response: Section 1899(f) of the Act provides that the Secretary may waive such requirements of sections 1128A and 1128B and title XVIII of the Act as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of section 1899 of the Act. Section 1899(c)(1) of the Act, as amended by the CURES Act and the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, provides that the Secretary shall determine an appropriate method to assign Medicare FFS beneficiaries to an ACO based on their utilization of primary care services provided by physicians in the ACO and, in the case of performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2019, services provided by a FQHC or RHC. We continue to believe that assigning beneficiaries to an ACO based on their receipt of primary care services furnished by physicians participating in the ACO is consistent with section 1899 of the Act, and that, to be consistent with that section, a claims-based assignment methodology must include a requirement that a beneficiary assigned to an ACO have received a primary care service from a physician participating in the ACO. We thank the commenters for their suggestion regarding possible future statutory changes to the beneficiary assignment requirements.

Comment: Several commenters responded to our request for comments on additional policies we should consider for potential future rulemaking on our assignment methodology, with the goal of increasing the number of Original Medicare FFS beneficiaries assigned to an ACO, particularly in underserved communities.

One commenter suggested lowering the minimum number of assigned beneficiaries required to support participation among smaller ACOs. A few commenters suggested changes to the voluntary alignment methodology, including the use of a paper process for beneficiaries to identify their primary care provider. One commenter also requested that voluntary alignment be a quarterly process and that CMS “confirm the selection through data.”

A few commenters made several recommendations to address concerns about assignment of beneficiaries receiving facility-based care (such as long-term care from a nursing facility, or short-term rehabilitative and skilled care in nursing facilities), and specifically about beneficiaries who have recently transitioned from receiving care from community-based primary care practitioners to facility-based primary care practitioners. One commenter, an ACO that exclusively serves Medicare beneficiaries who are long-term residents of nursing facilities, explained that the ACO experiences large year-over-year increases in the number of beneficiaries excluded from retrospective assignment as the result of the beneficiary already being prospectively assigned to another Shared Savings Program ACO or already being assigned to another Medicare shared savings initiative. The commenter explained that as a result of these policies, newly institutionalized beneficiaries are assigned to an ACO based on care from their former community-based primary care practitioners rather than care from facility-based primary care practitioners, creating what the commenter refers to as “misalignment from an accountability of care and value-based care participation perspective.” Similarly, another commenter stated that under current Shared Savings Program assignment policies, beneficiaries newly admitted to a nursing facility for long-term care are often “misaligned” to their previous community-based primary care practitioner because services received from the new nursing facility-based practitioner are not captured in the assignment window. These commenters recommended CMS exclude the Long-Term Institutionalized (LTI) population from initial assignment algorithms to prevent “their misalignment to outdated community-based primary care relationships that no longer provide care to these LTI beneficiaries,” and run a “separate LTI population assignment process” that identifies primary care physician visits and calculates the plurality of primary care services provided in facilities identified by place of service codes 31, 32, or 33, excluding primary care services provided during a Part A Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF) stay. Additionally, the commenters requested that CMS provide monthly, detailed beneficiary information to ACOs participating under preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation regarding beneficiaries who received at least one primary care service from an ACO provider during the performance year and who have been prospectively assigned to ACOs participating in other shared savings initiatives or to other Shared Savings Program ACOs.

Response: We appreciate these thoughtful comments in response to our comment solicitation. We may consider this information and these suggestions to inform future rulemaking.

After consideration of the public comments, we are finalizing our proposal to use an expanded window for assignment in a new step 3 to the claims-based assignment process to identify additional beneficiaries for ACO assignment (described in section III.G.3.a.(2)(b) of this final rule), for performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years. Specifically, we are modifying subpart E of the Shared Savings Program regulations to specify the revised beneficiary assignment methodology. We are specifying the new step 3 in a new provision at § 425.402(b)(5). We are also finalizing as proposed technical and conforming changes to incorporate the revised methodology. We are amending § 425.402(b)(1), describing the existing pre-step of the assignment methodology that would remain applicable for step 1 and step 2, to refer to the identification of all beneficiaries who had “at least one primary care service during the applicable assignment window with a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO and who is a primary care physician as defined under § 425.20 or who has one of the primary specialty designations included in [§ 425.402(c)]” (emphasis added to reflect revised text). In § 425.402(c), which indicates the primary specialty designations used in assignment, we are finalizing our proposal to specify that the listed specialties will be considered for ACO professionals in step 2 (as described in § 425.402(b)(4)) and step 3 (in the new provision at § 425.402(b)(5)) of the assignment methodology. In § 425.400(a)(2)(ii), which generally describes quarterly updates to preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, we are finalizing our proposal to specify that assignment will be updated quarterly based on the most recent 12 or 24 months of data, as applicable, under the methodology described in §§ 425.402 and 425.404. Lastly, in § 425.400(a)(3)(i), which generally describes prospective assignment of beneficiaries to ACOs at the beginning of each benchmark or performance year, we are finalizing our proposal to amend the reference that specifies that we base prospective assignment on the beneficiary's use of primary care services in the most recent 12 months for which data are available, to specify instead the beneficiary's use of primary care services in the most recent 12 months or 24 months, as applicable, for which data are available, using the assignment methodology described in §§ 425.402 and 425.404.

We are also finalizing our proposed amendments to § 425.20. We are finalizing our proposed modifications of the definition of “assignable beneficiary” to be consistent with the use of an expanded window for assignment in the new step 3 of the assignment methodology, to identify additional beneficiaries to include in the assignable population after application of the existing methodology. Specifically, we will continue to utilize the criterion in the existing definition, under which assignable beneficiary means a Medicare FFS beneficiary who receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 12-month assignment window from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c). Further, for performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, a Medicare FFS beneficiary who does not meet this requirement but who meets both of the following criteria will also be considered an assignable beneficiary:

(1) Receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 24-month expanded window for assignment from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c).

(2) Receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 12-month assignment window from a Medicare-enrolled practitioner who is an NP (as defined at § 410.75(b)), PA (as defined at § 410.74(a)(2)), or CNS (as defined at § 410.76(b)).

We are finalizing our proposed revisions to the definition of “assignment window,” for clarity and consistency, to mean the 12-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO, or to identify assignable beneficiaries, or both. We are also finalizing our proposal to add a new definition of “expanded window for assignment” to mean the 24-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO, or to identify assignable beneficiaries, or both that includes the applicable 12-month assignment window (as defined under § 425.20) and the preceding 12 months.

We are finalizing our proposal to amend provisions in subpart G of the Shared Savings Program regulations, within §§ 425.652, 425.654, and 425.656, that refer to the assignment window used to identify the assignable beneficiary population in order to incorporate references to the approach to using an expanded window for assignment in identifying the assignable population for performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years. We refer readers to the description of these changes, as proposed, in section III.G.3.a.(2)(c) of this final rule. Similarly, we are also finalizing our proposal to specify in the new provision we are finalizing at § 425.655(b)(1) that the assignable population that will be used to calculate average county prospective HCC and demographic risk scores for purposes of calculating the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor (refer to section III.G.4.b. of this final rule) will be identified for the relevant benchmark year or the performance year (as applicable) using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

b. Revisions to the Definition of Primary Care Services Used in Shared Savings Program Beneficiary Assignment

(1) Background

Section 1899(c)(1) of the Act, as amended by the CURES Act and the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, provides that for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2019, the Secretary shall assign beneficiaries to an ACO based on their utilization of primary care services provided by a physician who is an ACO professional and all services furnished by RHCs and FQHCs. However, the statute does not specify a list of services considered to be primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67853), we established the initial list of services, identified by Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) and Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) codes, that we considered to be primary care services. In that final rule, we indicated that we intended to monitor CPT and HCPCS codes and would consider making changes to the definition of primary care services to add or delete codes used to identify primary care services if there were sufficient evidence that revisions were warranted. We have updated the list of primary care service codes in subsequent rulemaking (refer to 80 FR 32746 through 32748; 80 FR 71270 through 71273; 82 FR 53212 through 53213; 83 FR 59964 through 59968; 85 FR 27582 through 27586; 85 FR 84747 through 84756; 85 FR 84785 through 84793; 86 FR 65273 through 65279; 87 FR 69821 through 69825) to reflect additions or modifications to the codes that have been recognized for payment under the PFS and to incorporate other changes to the definition of primary care services for purposes of the Shared Savings Program.

For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2023, and subsequent performance years, we defined primary care services in § 425.400(c)(1)(vii) for purposes of assigning beneficiaries to ACOs under § 425.402 as the set of services identified by the following HCPCS/CPT codes:

• CPT codes:

++ 96160 and 96161 (codes for administration of health risk assessment).

++ 99201 through 99215 (codes for office or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of a patient).

++ 99304 through 99318 (codes for professional services furnished in a nursing facility; professional services or services reported on an FQHC or RHC claim identified by these codes are excluded when furnished in a SNF).

++ 99319 through 99340 (codes for patient domiciliary, rest home, or custodial care visit).

++ 99341 through 99350 (codes for evaluation and management services furnished in a patient's home).

++ 99354 and 99355 (add-on codes, for prolonged evaluation and management or psychotherapy services beyond the typical service time of the primary procedure; when the base code is also a primary care service code under this paragraph (c)(1)(vi)).

++ 99421, 99422, and 99423 (codes for online digital evaluation and management).

++ 99424, 99425, 99426, and 99427 (codes for principal care management services).

++ 99437, 99487, 99489, 99490 and 99491 (codes for chronic care management).

++ 99439 (code for non-complex chronic care management).

++ 99483 (code for assessment of and care planning for patients with cognitive impairment).

++ 99484, 99492, 99493 and 99494 (codes for behavioral health integration services).

++ 99495 and 99496 (codes for transitional care management services).

++ 99497 and 99498 (codes for advance care planning; services identified by these codes furnished in an inpatient setting are excluded).

• HCPCS codes:

++ G0402 (code for the Welcome to Medicare visit).

++ G0438 and G0439 (codes for the annual wellness visits).

++ G0442 (code for alcohol misuse screening service).

++ G0443 (code for alcohol misuse counseling service).

++ G0444 (code for annual depression screening service).

++ G0463 (code for services furnished in ETA hospitals).

++ G0506 (code for chronic care management).

++ G2010 (code for the remote evaluation of patient video/images).

++ G2012 and G2252 (codes for virtual check-in).

++ G2058 (code for non-complex chronic care management).

++ G2064 and G2065 (codes for principal care management services).

++ G0317, G0318, and G2212 (code for prolonged office or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of a patient).

++ G2214 (code for psychiatric collaborative care model).

++ G3002 and G3003 (codes for chronic pain management).

• Primary care service codes include any CPT code identified by CMS that directly replaces a CPT code specified in paragraph (c)(1)(vii)(A) of § 425.400 or a HCPCS code specified in paragraph (c)(1)(vii)(B) of § 425.400, when the assignment window (as defined in § 425.20) for a benchmark or performance year includes any day on or after the effective date of the replacement code for payment purposes under FFS Medicare.

(2) Revisions

Based on feedback from ACOs and our further review of the HCPCS and CPT codes that are currently recognized for payment under the PFS or that we proposed to recognize for payment starting in CY 2024, we believe it would be appropriate to amend the definition of primary care services used in the Shared Savings Program assignment methodology to include certain additional codes and to make other technical changes to the definition of primary care services for use in determining beneficiary assignment for the performance year starting on January 1, 2024, and subsequent performance years, in order to remain consistent with billing and coding under the PFS.

We proposed to revise the definition of primary care services used for assignment in the Shared Savings Program regulations to include the following additions: (1) Smoking and Tobacco-use Cessation Counseling Services CPT codes 99406 and 99407; (2) Remote Physiologic Monitoring CPT codes 99457 and 99458; (3) Cervical or Vaginal Cancer Screening HCPCS code G0101; (4) Office-Based Opioid Use Disorder Services HCPCS codes G2086, G2087, and G2088; (5) Complex Evaluation and Management services Add-on HCPCS code G2211, if finalized under the Medicare FFS payment policy; (6) Community Health Integration (CHI) services HCPCS codes GXXX1 and GXXX2, if finalized under the Medicare FFS payment policy; (7) Principal Illness Navigation (PIN) services HCPCS codes GXXX3 and GXXX4, if finalized under the Medicare FFS payment policy; (8) SDOH Risk Assessment HCPCS code GXXX5, if finalized under the Medicare FFS payment policy; (9) Caregiver Behavior Management Training CPT codes 96202 and 96203, if finalized under the Medicare FFS payment policy; and (10) Caregiver Training services CPT codes 9X015, 9X016, and 9X017, if finalized under the Medicare FFS payment policy. The following provides additional information about the HCPCS codes that we proposed to add to the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment:

• Smoking and tobacco-use cessation counseling services CPT codes 99406 and 99407: Effective January 1, 2008, CPT codes 99406 ( Smoking and tobacco-use cessation counseling visit; intermediate, greater than 3 minutes up to 10 minutes ) and 99407 ( Smoking and tobacco-use cessation counseling visit; intensive, greater than 10 minutes ) were implemented for billing for smoking and tobacco-use cessation counseling services. As described in Medicare National Coverage Determinations (NCD) Manual, Publication 100-3, chapter 1, section 210.4.1, tobacco use remains the leading cause of preventable morbidity and mortality in the U.S. and is a major contributor to the nation's increasing medical costs. Despite the growing list of adverse health effects associated with smoking, more than 45 million U.S. adults continue to smoke and approximately 1,200 die prematurely each day from tobacco-related diseases. Since these are recognized as preventive services, 236 similar to other preventive services such as alcohol misuse screening and counseling (HCPCS codes G0442 and G0443) which are currently included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we believe it appropriate to include CPT codes that identify counseling to prevent tobacco use in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

236 Medicare Learning Network (MLN006559, May 2023) Medicare Preventive Services Quick Reference Chart, available at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prevention/PrevntionGenInfo/medicare-preventive-services/MPS-QuickReferenceChart-1.html#TOBACCO.

• Remote Physiologic Monitoring CPT codes 99457 and 99458: Chronic care remote physiologic monitoring (RPM) services involve the collection, analysis, and interpretation of digitally collected physiologic data, followed by the development of a treatment plan, and the managing of a patient under the treatment plan. In the CY 2020 PFS final rule (84 FR 62697) we finalized a revised CPT code 99457 ( Remote physiologic monitoring treatment management services, clinical staff/physician/other qualified health care professional time in a calendar month requiring interactive communication with the patient/caregiver during the month; initial 20 minutes ) and added CPT code 99458 ( Remote physiologic monitoring treatment management services, clinical staff/physician/other qualified health care professional time in a calendar month requiring interactive communication with the patient/caregiver during the month; additional 20 minutes ) to adopt the CPT Editorial Panel revised structure for CPT code 99457. The new code structure retained CPT code 99457 as a base code that describes the first 20 minutes of the treatment management services and uses a new add-on code to describe subsequent 20-minute intervals of the service. We further designated CPT codes 99457 and 99458 as care management services because care management services include establishing, implementing, revising, or monitoring treatment plans, as well as providing support services, and because RPM services include establishing, implementing, revising, and monitoring a specific treatment plan for a patient related to one or more chronic conditions that are monitored remotely. Because these remote therapeutic monitoring services are designated as care management services 237 and because we broadly include care management services (for example, CPT codes 99437, 99487, 99489, 99490 and 99491) in the Shared Savings Program definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we stated in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52451) that we believed CPT codes 99457 and 99458 should also be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

237 Medicare Physician Fee Schedule Care Management Services Information, available at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/PhysicianFeeSched/Care-Management.

• Cervical or Vaginal Cancer Screening Code HCPCS code G0101: Section 4102 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 provides for coverage of screening pelvic examinations (including a clinical breast examination) for all female beneficiaries, subject to certain frequency and other limitations. 238 Cervical and vaginal cancer screening and clinical breast examination are important preventive health care services intended to detect early cancer, precancers and sexually transmitted infections. HCPCS code G0101 ( Cervical or vaginal cancer screening; pelvic and clinical breast examination ) can be reimbursed by Medicare Part B every 2 years. For patients who are considered high risk, reimbursement is allowed on an annual basis. Obstetrics/gynecology and gynecology/oncology are identified as physician specialty designations for purposes of identifying primary care services furnished to beneficiaries used in assignment operations according to § 425.402(c), so we believe it appropriate to use wellness and preventive care visits provided by these specialists in our definition of primary care services used in assignment. We consider these to be a preventive health service that can be provided in a primary care setting 239 similar to the annual wellness visit (AWV) HCPCS codes G0438 and G0439, which are already included in the Shared Savings Program definition of primary care services used in assignment, so we believe that they should be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

238 Medicare National Coverage Determination for Screening Pap Smears and Pelvic Examinations for Early Detection of Cervical or Vaginal Cancers (Pub. No. 100-3, Manual Section 210.2), available at https://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/view/ncd.aspx?NCDId=185#:~:text=Section%204102%20of%20the%20Balanced%20Budget%20Act%20of,beneficiaries%2C%20subject%20to%20certain%20frequency%20and%20other%20limitations.

239 Medicare Learning Network (MLN006559, May 2023) Medicare Preventive Services Quick Reference Chart, available at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prevention/PrevntionGenInfo/medicare-preventive-services/MPS-QuickReferenceChart-1.html#PELVIC.

• Office-Based Opioid Use Disorder Services HCPCS Codes G2086, G2087, and G2088: In the CY 2020 PFS final rule (84 FR 62568), we finalized our proposal to establish bundled payments for the overall treatment of Opioid Use Disorder (OUD), including management, care coordination, psychotherapy, and counseling activities HCPCS codes G2086 ( Office-based treatment for opioid use disorder, including development of the treatment plan, care coordination, individual therapy and group therapy and counseling; at least 70 minutes in the first calendar month ), G2087 ( Office-based treatment for opioid use disorder, including care coordination, individual therapy and group therapy and counseling; at least 60 minutes in a subsequent calendar month ), and G2088 ( Office-based treatment for opioid use disorder, including care coordination, individual therapy and group therapy and counseling; each additional 30 minutes beyond the first 120 minutes (List separately in addition to code for primary procedure) ). Refer to the CY 2020 PFS final rule (84 FR 62673) for detailed, technical discussion regarding the description, payment, and utilization of these HCPCS codes.

The bundled payment under the PFS for office-based treatment for OUD was intended to create an avenue for physicians and other health professionals to bill for a bundle of services that is similar to the bundled OUD treatment services benefit, but not furnished by an Opioid Treatment Program (OTP). By creating a separate bundled payment for these services under the PFS, we hoped to incentivize increased provision of counseling and care coordination for patients with OUD in the office setting, thereby expanding access to OUD care. In the proposed rule we noted that use of these codes is limited to only beneficiaries diagnosed with OUD and these codes should not be billed for beneficiaries who are receiving treatment at an OTP, as we believe that would be duplicative since the bundled payments made to OTPs cover similar services for the treatment of OUD.

Because the separately reportable initiating visit requirement for the OUD bundle HCPCS codes G2086, G2087 and G2088 is similar to the separately reportable initiating visit requirements for chronic care management (CCM) services, and behavioral health integration services (BHI), as they include overall management and care coordination activities, we stated we believed these services should be considered primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment. 240 Additionally, as we stated in the proposed rule, we anticipated that the billing clinician, likely an addiction medicine specialist, would manage the patient's overall OUD care, as well as supervise any other individuals participating in the treatment, such as those billing incident to services of the billing physician or other practitioner, which is similar to the requirements related to the furnishing of psychiatric collaborative care model (CoCM) services. CCM, BHI, CoCM, and alcohol misuse screening and counseling services are included in our definition of primary care services, so we believe that HCPCS codes G2086, G2087 and G2088 are appropriate to be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment. For additional clarity, incident to services are services rendered to a patient by a provider other than the physician treating the patient more broadly, that are an integral, although incidental, part of the patient's normal course of diagnosis or treatment of an injury or illness. These services are billed as Medicare Part B services, as if the original physician personally provided the care using that physician's NPI number. As we stated in the proposed rule, we anticipated that these services would often be billed by addiction specialty practitioners but note that these codes are not limited to use by any particular physician or non-physician practitioner specialty. Further, since addiction medicine is identified as one of the physician specialty designations for purposes of identifying primary care services used in assignment operations according to § 425.402(c)(13), we believed it would be appropriate to include care coordination services provided by these specialists in our definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

240 Medicare Physician Fee Schedule Office-Based Opioid Use Disorder (OUD) Treatment Billing Information, available at https://www.cms.gov/medicare/physician-fee-schedule/office-based-opioid-use-disorder-oud-treatment-billing.

We further recognized that OUD bundle HCPCS codes G2086, G2087 and G2088 are identified as codes for alcohol and substance abuse-related diagnoses that are excluded from Shared Savings Program Claim and Claim Line Feeds. Given this, we want to make transparent that ACOs will not be able to see the claims that may have been used in assignment for beneficiaries receiving OUD services, and possibly not be able to identify why certain beneficiaries were assigned to their ACO related to these codes.

• Complex Evaluation and Management Services Add-on HCPCS Code G2211, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy: As discussed in section II.F. of the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52350 through 88 FR 52356), HCPCS add-on code G2211 ( Visit complexity inherent to evaluation and management associated with medical care services that serve as the continuing focal point for all needed health care services and/or with medical care services that are part of ongoing care related to a patient's single, serious condition or a complex condition. (Add-on code, list separately in addition to office/outpatient evaluation and management visit, new or established) ) can be reported in conjunction with office/outpatient (O/O) evaluation and management (E/M) visits to better account for additional resources associated with primary care, or similarly ongoing medical care related to a patient's single, serious condition, or complex condition (84 FR 62854 through 62856, 85 FR 84571). Section 113 of Division CC of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (Pub. L. 116-260, December 27, 2020) imposed a moratorium on Medicare payment for this service by prohibiting CMS from making payment under the PFS for inherently complex E/M visits described by HCPCS code G2211 (or any successor or substantially similar code) before January 1, 2024. The moratorium on Medicare payment under the PFS for HCPCS code G2211 will end on December 31, 2023, therefore we proposed to make HCPCS code G2211 separately payable effective January 1, 2024. Refer to section II.E of this final rule for finalized detailed, technical discussion regarding the description, payment, and utilization of this HCPCS code.

Since HCPCS code G2211 is an add-on code used in conjunction with O/O E/M services and such services are included in our definition of primary care services, we stated in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule that we believed that the proposed inclusion of HCPCS code G2211 is consistent with our intent to encompass primary care and wellness services in the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

• Community Health Integration Services HCPCS Codes GXXX1 and GXXX2, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policies: In section II.E of the proposed rule (88 FR 52307 through 88 FR 52350), we proposed separate coding, payment, service elements and documentation requirements for the following CHI services:

GXXX1 Community health integration (CHI) services performed by certified or trained auxiliary personnel including a community health worker, under the direction of a physician or other practitioner; 60 minutes per calendar month, in the following activities to address social determinants of health (SDOH) need(s) that are significantly limiting ability to diagnose or treat problem(s) addressed in an initiating E/M visit:

• Person-centered assessment, performed to better understand the individualized context of the intersection between the SDOH need(s) and problem(s) addressed in the initiating E/M visit.

++ Conducting a person-centered assessment to understand patient's life story, strengths, needs, goals, preferences and desired outcomes, including understanding cultural and linguistic factors.

++ Facilitating patient-driven goal-setting and establishing an action plan.

++ Providing tailored support to the patient as needed to accomplish the practitioner's treatment plan.

• Practitioner, Home, and Community-Based Care Coordination

++ Coordination with practitioner; home, and community-based service providers; and caregiver (if applicable).

++ Communication with practitioners, home- and community-based service providers, hospitals, and skilled nursing facilities (or other health care facilities) regarding the patient's psychosocial strengths and needs, functional deficits, goals, preferences, and desired outcomes, including cultural and linguistic factors.

++ Coordination of care transitions between and among health care practitioners and settings, including transitions involving referrals to other clinicians; follow-up after an emergency department visit; or follow-up after discharges from hospitals, skilled nursing facilities or other health care facilities.

++ Facilitating access to community-based social services (e.g., housing, utilities, transportation, food assistance) to address SDOH need(s).

• Health education- Helping the patient contextualize health education provided by the patient's treatment team with the patient's individual needs, goals, and preferences, in the context of the SDOH need(s), and educating the patient on how to best participate in medical decision-making.

• Building patient self-advocacy skills, so that the patient can interact with members of the health care team and related community-based services addressing the SDOH need(s), in ways that are more likely to promote personalized and effective diagnosis and treatment.

• Health care access/health system navigation:

++ Helping the patient access care, including identifying appropriate practitioners or providers for clinical care and helping secure appointments with them.

• Facilitating behavioral change as necessary for meeting diagnosis and treatment goals, including promoting patient motivation to participate in care and reach person-centered diagnosis or treatment goals.

• Facilitating and providing social and emotional support to help the patient cope with the problem(s) addressed in the initiating visit, the SDOH need(s), and adjust daily routines to better meet diagnosis and treatment goals.

GXXX2—Community health integration services, each additional 30 minutes per calendar month (List separately in addition to GXXX1).

As described in section II.E of the proposed rule, all auxiliary personnel who provide CHI services must be certified or trained to perform all included service elements and authorized to perform them under applicable State laws and regulations. Under § 410.26(a)(1) of our regulations, auxiliary personnel must meet any applicable requirements to provide incident to services, including licensure, imposed by the State in which the services are being furnished. 241 A billing practitioner may arrange to have CHI services provided by auxiliary personnel external to, and under contract with, the practitioner or their practice, such as through a community-based organization (CBO) that employs CHWs, if all of the “incident to” and other requirements and conditions for payment of CHI services are met. The payment policy described in section II.E of this final rule explains that we would expect the auxiliary personnel performing the CHI services to communicate regularly with the billing practitioner to ensure that CHI services are appropriately documented in the medical record, and to continue to involve the billing practitioner in evaluating the continuing need for CHI services to address the SDOH need(s) that limit the practitioner's ability to diagnose and treat the problem(s) addressed in the initiating visit. Refer to section II.E of this final rule for the finalized detailed, technical discussion regarding the proposed description, payment and utilization of these HCPCS codes.

241 CHW Roles As Outlined In The C3 Project available at https://chwtraining.org/c3-project-chw-skills/.

Since the proposal described in section II.E. of the proposed rule proposed to designate CHI services as care management services that may be furnished under general supervision under § 410.26(b)(5) and because we broadly include care management services in the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we stated that we believed it would be similarly appropriate to include CHI services in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment. Additionally, since CHI services require an initiating E/M visit and these services can be billed as incident to by the billing practitioner who bills for the CHI initiating E/M visit, and E/M services are currently included in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we also stated that we believed it would be similarly appropriate to include CHI services in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

• Principal Illness Navigation (PIN) Services HCPCS codes GXXX3 and GXXX4, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policies: In section II.E of the proposed rule, we proposed new coding for Principal Illness Navigation (PIN) services. In considering the appropriate patient population to receive these services, we considered the patient population eligible for principal care management service codes (CPT codes 99424 through 99427), as well as clinical definitions of “serious illness.” For example, one peer-review study defined “serious illness” as a health condition that carries a high-risk of mortality and either negatively impacts a person's daily function or quality of life, or excessively strains their caregivers. 242 Another study describes a serious illness as a health condition that carries a high-risk of mortality and commonly affects a patient for several years, while some measure serious illness by the amount of urgent health care use (911 calls, emergency department visits, repeated hospitalizations) and polypharmacy. 243 The navigation services such patients need are similar to CHI services, SDOH need(s) may be fewer or not present. Accordingly, a parallel set of services focused on patients with a serious, high-risk illness who may not necessarily have SDOH-related needs was proposed. PIN services could be furnished following an initiating E/M visit addressing a single high-risk disease.

242 Kelley AS, Bollens-Lund E., Identifying the Population with Serious Illness: The “Denominator” Challenge. J Palliat Med. 2018 Mar;21(S2): S7-S16. doi: 10.1089/jpm.2017.0548. Epub 2017 Nov 10. PMID: 29125784; PMCID: PMC5756466. available at https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29125784/.

243 Silver, Alison. Serious Illness: A High Priority for Accountable Care. The American Journal of Accountable Care. 2020;8(2):32-33. available at https://www.ajmc.com/view/serious-illness-a-high-priority-for-accountable-care.

The following codes would be reported for PIN services:

GXXX3 Principal Illness Navigation services by certified or trained auxiliary personnel under the direction of a physician or other practitioner, including a patient navigator or certified peer specialist; 60 minutes per calendar month, in the following activities:

• Person-centered assessment, performed to better understand the individualized context of the serious, high-risk condition.

++ Conducting a person-centered assessment to understand the patient's life story, needs, goals, preferences, and desired outcomes, including understanding cultural and linguistic factors.

++ Facilitating patient-driven goal setting and creating an action plan.

++ Providing tailored support as needed to accomplish the practitioner's treatment plan.

• Identifying or referring patient (and caregiver or family, if applicable) to appropriate supportive services.

• Practitioner, Home, and Community-Based Care Coordination

++ Coordinating receipt of needed services from healthcare practitioners, providers and facilities; home-, and community-based service providers; and caregiver (if applicable).

++ Communication with practitioners, home-, and community-based service providers, hospitals, and skilled nursing facilities (or other health care facilities) regarding the patient's psychosocial strengths and needs, functional deficits, goals, and preferences, including cultural and linguistic factors.

++ Coordination of care transitions between and among health care practitioners and settings, including transitions involving referrals to other clinicians; follow-up after an emergency department visit; or follow-up after discharges from hospitals, skilled nursing facilities or other health care facilities.

++ Facilitating access to community-based social services (e.g., housing, utilities, transportation, food assistance) as needed to address SDOH need(s).

• Health education- Helping the patients contextualize health education provided by the patient's treatment team with the patient's individual needs, goals, preferences, and SDOH need(s), and educating the patient (and caregiver, if applicable) on how to best participate in medical decision-making.

• Building patient self-advocacy skills, so that the patient can interact with members of the health care team and related community-based services (as needed), in ways that are more likely to promote personalized and effective treatment of their condition.

• Health care access / health system navigation.

++ Helping the patient access healthcare, identifying appropriate practitioners or providers for clinical care and helping secure appointments with them.

• Facilitating behavioral change necessary for meeting diagnosis and treatment goals, including promoting patient motivation to participate in care and reach person-centered diagnosis or treatment goals.

• Facilitating and providing social and emotional support for the patient to help the patient cope with the condition, SDOH need(s), and adjust daily routines to better meet diagnosis or treatment goals.

• Leverage knowledge of the serious, high-risk condition and/or lived experience when applicable to provide support, mentorship, or inspiration to meet treatment goals.

GXXX4—Principal Illness Navigation services, additional 30 minutes per calendar month (List separately in addition to GXXX3).

As discussed in section II.E of the proposed rule, a billing practitioner may arrange to have PIN services provided by auxiliary personnel who are external to, and under contract with, the practitioner or their practice, such as through a community-based organization (CBO) that employs CHWs, if all of the “incident to” and other requirements and conditions for payment of PIN services are met. We will expect the auxiliary personnel performing the PIN services to communicate regularly with the billing practitioner to ensure that PIN services are appropriately documented in the medical record, and to continue to involve the billing practitioner in evaluating the continuing need for PIN services to address the serious, high-risk condition. Refer to section II.E of this final rule for finalized detailed, technical discussion regarding the description, payment and utilization of these HCPCS codes.

Since the proposal described in section II.E. of the proposed rule proposed to designate PIN services as care management services that may be furnished under general supervision under § 410.26(b)(5) and because we broadly include care management services in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we believed it would be similarly appropriate to include PIN services in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment. Additionally, since these services are meant to provide assistance to the beneficiary through communication and coordination with practitioners, providers, including referrals to other clinicians and follow-up after emergency or inpatient care, we stated in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule that we believed that these services can further the ACO's goal of care coordination and the provision of value-based care, and therefore, should be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment. Further, since PIN services require an initiating E/M visit and these services can be billed as incident to by the billing practitioner who bills for the PIN initiating E/M visit, and E/M services are currently included in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we stated that we believed it would be similarly appropriate to include PIN services in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment.

• SDOH Risk Assessment HCPCS code GXXX5, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policies: In section II.E of the proposed rule, we proposed a new stand-alone G code, GXXX5 ( administration of a standardized, evidence-based Social Determinants of Health Risk Assessment tool, 5-15 minutes, at most every 6 months.) to identify and value the work involved in the utilization of SDOH risk assessment as part of a comprehensive social history when medically reasonable and necessary in relation to an E/M visit. SDOH risk assessment through a standardized, evidence-based tool can more effectively and consistently identify unmet SDOH needs and enables comparisons across populations. The SDOH risk assessment must be furnished by the practitioner on the same date they furnish an E/M visit, as the SDOH assessment would be reasonable and necessary when used to inform the patient's treatment plan that is established during the visit. Finalized required elements are described in detail in the payment policy described in section II.E of this final rule.

Under the proposal described in section II.E. of the proposed rule (88 FR 52307 through 88 FR 52350), the practitioner billing or furnishing the SDOH risk assessment would be required to have the ability to furnish CHI or other care management services. Given the multifaceted nature of SDOH needs, ensuring adequate referral to appropriate services and supports is critical for addressing both the SDOH need and the impact of that need on the patient's health. Refer to section II.E and III.R of this final rule for finalized detailed, technical discussion regarding the description, payment, and utilization of this HCPCS code.

Additionally, the proposal detailed in section III.S. of the proposed rule (88 FR 52548 through 88 FR 52553) proposed to add elements to the AWV by adding a new SDOH Risk Assessment as an optional, additional element with an additional payment. Under that proposal, the SDOH Risk Assessment would be separately payable with no beneficiary cost sharing when furnished as part of the same visit with the same date of service as the AWV and would inform the care the patient is receiving during the visit, including taking a medical and social history, applying health assessments, and conducting prevention services education and planning.

Since the proposals described in sections II.E. and III.S. of the proposed rule proposed that these services would be provided in conjunction with professional services, such as E/M visits, which can be provided in a primary care setting, we stated in the proposed rule that we believed it would be appropriate to include these services in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment. Additionally, since these are separately payable services when provided with an AWV and the AWV is included in the Shared Savings Program definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we stated we believed it would be appropriate to include SDOH risk assessment in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment. Further, since these services precede the utilization of CHI, PIN, and Care Management services, which are either currently included or proposed to be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of assignment, we stated that we believed the inclusion of the new SDOH risk assessment HCPCS code would be appropriate as well.

• Caregiver Behavior Management Training CPT Codes 96202 and 96203, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy: CPT code 96202 ( Multiple-family group behavior management/modification training for guardians/caregivers of patients with a mental or physical health diagnosis, administered by physician or other qualified health care professional (without the patient present), face-to-face with multiple sets of guardians/caregivers; initial 60 minutes ) and its add-on code, CPT code 96203 ( Multiple-family group behavior management/modification training for guardians/caregivers of patients with a mental or physical health diagnosis, administered by physician or other qualified health care professional (without the patient present), face-to-face with multiple sets of guardians/caregivers; each additional 15 minutes (List separately in addition to code for primary service) ) are two new codes created by the CPT Editorial Panel during its February 2021 meeting used to report the total duration of face-to-face time spent by the physician or other qualified health professional providing group training to guardians or caregivers of patients. Although the patient does not attend the group trainings, the goals and outcomes of the sessions focus on interventions aimed at improving the patient's daily life.

In section II.E. of the proposed rule, an active payment status for CPT codes 96202 and 96203 (caregiver behavior management/modification training services) was proposed for CY 2024. These codes allow treating practitioners to report training furnished to a caregiver, in tandem with the diagnostic and treatment services furnished directly to the patient, in strategies and specific activities to assist the patient to carry out the treatment plan. Caregiver behavior management/modification training services may be reasonable and necessary when they are integral to a patient's overall treatment and furnished after the treatment plan (or therapy plan of care) is established. The caregiver behavior management/modification training services themselves need to be congruent with the treatment plan to effectuate the desired patient outcomes.

For purposes of caregiver behavior management/modification training services, our proposal required that a caregiver receiving behavior management/modification training services be a family member, friend, or neighbor who provides unpaid assistance to the patient, assisting or acting as a proxy for a patient with an illness or condition of short or long-term duration (not necessarily chronic or disabling). In this context, caregivers would be trained by the treating practitioner in strategies and specific activities that improve symptoms, functioning, adherence to treatment, and/or general welfare related to the patient's primary clinical diagnoses. Under the proposal, caregiver behavior management/modification training services could be furnished directly by the treating practitioner or provided by auxiliary personnel incident to the treating practitioner's professional services as specified in § 410.26, as applicable for the types of practitioners whose covered services include “incident to” services. Refer to section II.E of this final rule for finalized detailed, technical discussion regarding the description, payment, and utilization of these CPT codes.

Since the proposal described in section II.E. of the proposed rule proposed that these services could be billed as incident to by the billing practitioner who could be a primary care physician who also bills for an E/M visit, and these services cannot duplicate services provided in conjunction with transitional care management, CCM, BHI services, and virtual check-in services which are currently included in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we stated in the proposed rule that we believed that these services should be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment in support of the Shared Savings Program's goal to provide coordinated, high quality care to an ACO's Medicare beneficiaries.

• Caregiver Training Services CPT codes 9X015, 9X016, and 9X017, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy: CPT codes 9X015 ( Caregiver training in strategies and techniques to facilitate the patient's functional performance in the home or community (e.g., activities of daily living [ADLs], instrumental ADLs [IADLs], transfers, mobility, communication, swallowing, feeding, problem solving, safety practices) (without the patient present), face-to-face; initial 30 minutes ), add-on code, CPT code 9X016 ( each additional 15 minutes (List separately in addition to code for primary service) (Use 9X016 in conjunction with 9X015)), and 9X017 (Group caregiver training in strategies and techniques to facilitate the patient's functional performance in the home or community (e.g., activities of daily living [ADLs], instrumental ADLs [IADLs], transfers, mobility, communication, swallowing, feeding, problem solving, safety practices) (without the patient present), face-to-face with multiple sets of caregivers) are new codes created by the CPT Editorial Panel during its October 2022 meeting. The three codes are to be used to report the total duration of face-to-face time spent by the physician or other qualified health professional providing individual or group training to caregivers of patients. Although the patient does not attend the trainings, the goals and outcomes of the sessions focus on interventions aimed at improving the patient's ability to successfully perform activities of daily living (ADLs). Activities of daily living generally include ambulating, feeding, dressing, personal hygiene, continence, and toileting.

These codes allow treating practitioners to report the training furnished to a caregiver, in tandem with the diagnostic and treatment services furnished directly to the patient, in strategies and specific activities to assist the patient to carry out the treatment plan. As discussed above, we believe training furnished to a caregiver may be reasonable and necessary when it is integral to a patient's overall treatment and furnished after the treatment plan (or therapy plan of care) is established. The Caregiver Training Services (CTS) themselves need to be congruent with the treatment plan to effectuate the desired patient outcomes, especially in medical treatment scenarios where the caregiver receiving CTS is necessary to ensure a successful treatment outcome for the patient.

In section II.E. of the proposed rule, we proposed an active payment status for CPT codes 9X015, 9X016, and 9X017 for CY 2024. CTS may be furnished directly by the treating practitioner or provided by auxiliary personnel incident to the treating practitioner's professional services as specified in 42 CFR 410.26, as applicable for the types of practitioners whose covered services include “incident to” services. Under the proposal, 9X015, 9X016, and 9X017 would be designated as “sometimes therapy.” This means that the services represented by these codes are always furnished under a therapy plan of care when provided by PTs, OTs, and SLPs; but, in cases where they are appropriately furnished by physicians and NPPs outside a therapy plan of care (that is, where the services are not integral to a therapy plan of care), they can be furnished under a treatment plan by physicians and NPPs. Refer to section II.E of this final rule for finalized, detailed, technical discussion regarding the description, payment, and utilization of these HCPCS codes.

The proposal described in section II.E. of the proposed rule proposed that these services could be billed as incident to by the billing practitioner who could be a primary care physician who also bills for an E/M visit. Additionally, these services cannot duplicate services provided in conjunction with transitional care management, CCM, BHI services, and virtual check-in services which are currently included in the list of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment and these services are reported to Medicare only when furnished in conjunction with treatment for particular conditions and reflected in a plan of care. In the proposed rule, we stated that we believed they should be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment in support of the Shared Savings Program's goal to give coordinated, high quality care to an ACO's Medicare beneficiaries.

We proposed to specify a revised definition of primary care services in a new provision of the Shared Savings Program regulations at § 425.400(c)(1)(viii) to include the list of HCPCS and CPT codes specified in § 425.400(c)(1)(vii) along with the proposed additional CPT codes 99406 and 99407, and 99457 and 99458, 96202 and 96203, if finalized under the Medicare FFS payment policy; and 9X015, 9X016, and 9X017, if finalized under the Medicare FFS payment policy and HCPCS codes G0101; G2086, G2087, and G2088; G2211, if finalized under the Medicare FFS payment policy; GXXX1 and GXXX2, if finalized under Medicare FFS payment policy; GXXX3 and GXXX4, if finalized under the Medicare FFS payment policy; and GXXX5, if finalized under the Medicare FFS payment policy; as discussed in the preceding paragraphs. We proposed that the new provision at § 425.400(c)(1)(viii) would be applicable for use in determining beneficiary assignment for the performance year starting on January 1, 2024, and subsequent performance years.

We solicited comments on these proposed changes to the definition of primary care services used for assigning beneficiaries to Shared Savings Program ACOs for the performance year starting on January 1, 2024, and subsequent performance years. We also solicited comments on any other existing HCPCS or CPT codes and new HCPCS or CPT codes proposed elsewhere in this final rule that we should consider adding to the definition of primary care services for purposes of assignment in future rulemaking.

We received public comments on these proposals. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: Most commenters were supportive of our proposal to add the following codes to the definition of primary care services used in assignment: (1) Smoking and Tobacco-use Cessation Counseling Services CPT codes 99406 and 99407; (2) Cervical or Vaginal Cancer Screening HCPCS code G0101; (3) Visit complexity inherent to evaluation and management services add-on (referred to as Complex Evaluation and Management Services Add-on in the proposed rule) HCPCS code G2211; (4) CHI services HCPCS codes GXXX1 and GXXX2; (5) PIN services HCPCS codes GXXX3 and GXXX4; (6) Caregiver Behavior Management Training CPT codes 96202 and 96203; (7) Caregiver Training Services CPT codes 9X015, 9X016, and 9X017; and (8) SDOH Risk Assessment HCPCS code GXXX5. These commenters stated that these codes accurately reflect comprehensive, coordinated, whole-person primary care.

Many commenters expressed support for our proposal to include caregiver training and SDOH risk assessment services in the definition of primary care services used for purpose of beneficiary assignment, noting that they work well together with other CMS initiatives and further support ACOs in providing comprehensive, coordinated, whole-person primary care, recognizing the importance of capturing information on and screening for SDOH. One commenter recognized that considering SDOH risk assessment services in beneficiary assignment could potentially improve the health of a wide swath of Medicare beneficiaries by increasing access to social determinants of health risk assessments and “making them more affordable”.

One commenter stated their support for inclusion of several behavioral health services, sexual and reproductive health-related services, and several team-based care services as these additions would help primary care practices in ACOs continue to move closer to providing whole-patient, comprehensive primary care.

Response: We agree with commenters who recognize that our proposal to revise the definition of primary care services used for assignment will align well with other CMS initiatives, specifically those that promote health equity, and will help primary care practices to continue to move closer to providing whole-patient, comprehensive primary care. Without additional context, it is not clear how the inclusion of a service in the definition of primary care services used for Shared Savings Program beneficiary assignment would be likely to make a particular included service more affordable for beneficiaries. We interpret the comment from the commenter who supports inclusion of several behavioral health services, sexual and reproductive health-related services, and several team-based care services to be referring to our proposals related to smoking and tobacco-use cessation counseling services, cervical or vaginal cancer screening, OUD services, PIN services, CHI services, SDOH risk assessment services, and caregiver behavior management training services, and caregiver training services, and we appreciate this commenter's support.

Comment: Many commenters, while stating their support for the inclusion of the codes proposed, also urged CMS to continue to monitor the impact of expanding the definition of primary care services to include the “additional PFS codes”, and to respond to any identified unintended consequences and consider changes to mitigate any unintended consequences in a timely manner. Several commenters urged CMS not to move forward with the proposal to expand the list of primary care services/codes in beneficiary assignment, stating many of the proposed codes would be new codes to the CY 2024 PFS and it is unclear what redistributive impact the proposed codes would have on assignment and encouraged CMS to perform additional analysis on potential impact of this policy and allow for an appropriate phase-in period. Another commenter recommended “thorough, multi-year testing to ensure that patients are not aligned to ACOs strictly because of billing practices by clinicians unsuited for patient care coordination”. One commenter recommended a “phase-in period to better understand how the expanded beneficiary population will impact care delivery and financial assumptions”. The commenter stated that for some ACOs, this newly attributed population may represent a higher risk/acuity with “no growth option for the ACO's risk score to accurately reflect the change resulting from a CMS rule”. Another commenter did not support the inclusion of the code for SDOH risk assessment as it does not have utilization history and so they noted it is premature to use it in assignment under in the Shared Savings Program.

Response: As described in our proposed rule, we consider these codes to be primary care and wellness services that fit within the definition of primary care services. It is important for the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment to remain in sync with billing and coding updates and changes and include appropriate new CPT and HCPCS codes as they are implemented. Waiting for a phase-in of new assignment codes or conducting multi-year testing of codes could result in beneficiaries not being assigned to an ACO based on primary care services that are provided by their primary care provider as utilization of these services is implemented. Implementing billing and coding updates and changes as they are finalized under the PFS is important for purposes of assignment to ensure that beneficiaries are assigned appropriately as services billed shifts from already existing CPT/HCPCS codes to new CPT/HCPCS codes. If the Shared Savings Program is out of sync with changes and updates, assignment of beneficiaries could be inaccurate. Commenters were not specific in discussing unintended consequences that could occur should these services be added to the definition of primary care services used in beneficiary assignment. Therefore, we do not know what consequences they are concerned about and so we are not persuaded by these comments.

With regard to the commenter concerned that adding these codes will result in the assignment of higher risk beneficiaries to the ACO and that the higher risk profile of these beneficiaries will not be full recognized as a result of the cap on an ACO's risk score growth during an agreement period, we note that the Shared Savings Program uses the CMS-HCC prospective risk adjustment model which adjusts for changes in severity and case mix and accounts for differences in health status of an ACO's assigned beneficiary population between the benchmark and performance years. Additionally, adding these codes in conjunction with other risk adjustment policies finalized in this rule (section III.G.4) would help mitigate impacts on the cap on prospective HCC risk score growth, and we are providing these updates to increase accountable care for beneficiaries. For more information on risk adjustment in the Shared Savings Program, please review the Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications, Version 11. 244 Commenters did not go into detail regarding what redistributive impacts could be or what specifically could be impacted and so we are not persuaded by these comments.

The SDOH Risk Assessment service is an optional, additional element of the AWV with an additional payment and no applicable beneficiary cost sharing, and the AWV is included in the definition of primary care services used for purposes of assignment. Additionally, we note that these services precede the inclusion of current services included in the definition of PCS for purposes of assignment, which are already included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of assignment. Accordingly, we are not persuaded by the comment suggesting we should not include this service in the definition of primary care in light of its limited utilization history.

In section II.E of this final rule, we also recognize the AWV as an initiating visit for PIN services when the AWV is furnished by a practitioner who has identified in the AWV a high-risk condition(s) that would qualify for PIN services under this rule. The AWV is included in the definition of primary care services used for purposes of assignment and so provides further rationale for the inclusion of PIN services in said definition.

Additionally, we are not persuaded by the commenters concerns suggesting that the proposed additional codes could assign patients to ACOs through clinicians unsuited for patient care coordination. For example, as described in section II.E of this final rule, we clarified that all auxiliary personnel who provide CHI services must be certified or trained to perform all included service elements and, as relevant, authorized to perform them under applicable State laws and regulations. For States that do not have applicable requirements for certification and training, it is the billing practitioner's responsibility to ensure the auxiliary personnel have been certified and trained in accordance with our final requirements.

Comment: One commenter cautioned that inclusion of the proposed codes will lead to assignment based on services furnished by specialists who are not positioned to provide comprehensive primary care. Another commenter who supported the inclusion of many of the codes recommended CMS remember the unique considerations related to differentiating assignment between primary care and specialty care services as part of beneficiary assignment and asked that CMS monitor to ensure the services included in the assignment methodology continue to support the delivery of comprehensive, coordinated, whole-person primary care and do not have the unintended consequence of disrupting ongoing patient-physician relationships.

Some commenters expressed support for inclusion of all the proposed revisions with the exception of the code for cervical or vaginal cancer screening since this service is provided by obstetricians or gynecologists and including this code in the assignment methodology risks shifting assignment away from primary care relationships in favor of specialty care. Another commenter urged CMS to consider removing tobacco-use cessation counseling services from the list because they are concerned that it will assign beneficiaries to the ACO that may not accurately reflect patients who are may not be receiving primary care services from ACO physicians, as physicians across different specialties will provide tobacco-use cessation counseling services. Other commenters recommend that we monitor the billing of these codes to ensure that their addition is not shifting beneficiary attribution away from primary care relationships in favor of specialty care.

Response: We acknowledge the commenters who opposed or expressed concerns about inclusion of some of the codes on the basis that they may shifting assignment away from primary care relationships in favor of specialty care. Consistent with our current methodology, if services billed under these codes are provided by specialists not considered for purposes of beneficiary assignment, then the services will not be considered in beneficiary assignment.

The cervical or vaginal cancer screening preventive health service can be provided in a primary care setting similar to the AWV HCPCS codes G0438 and G0439, which are already included in the Shared Savings Program definition of primary care services used in assignment. Additionally, as noted in this section of this final rule, obstetrics/gynecology and gynecology/oncology are identified as physician specialty designations considered for purposes of identifying primary care services furnished to beneficiaries used in assignment operations according to § 425.402(c), so we are not persuaded by these comments.

Smoking and tobacco-use cessation counseling services are recognized as preventive services, like other preventive services such as alcohol misuse screening and counseling, the AWV, and depression screening, which are currently included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment. Further, smoking and tobacco-use cessation counseling services encourage comprehensive, coordinated whole person-centered care and can be provided in a primary care setting. Additionally, these services are generally billed in conjunction with an E/M visit which is currently included in the definition of primary care services. Finally, smoking-related diseases are a leading cause of death among individuals with substance use disorders, and individuals who treat their addiction to tobacco and other substances at the same time are 25 percent more likely to sustain their recovery, compared to the individuals who do not address tobacco while in recovery from alcohol and other drugs. 245 In support of the CMS' goal to expand mental health services and SUD treatment, we believe it to be important for us to recognize these services for purposes of beneficiary assignment. For these reasons, and the reasons stated in this section of this final rule, we continue to believe they should be included in our assignment methodology.

245 Lung Cancer Screening Billing Guide Addendum for Behavioral Health available at https://www.lung.org/getmedia/5adda30d-6738-4e3e-8666-621cc5120d4d/ala-billing-guide-addendum.pdf.

Comment: Some commenters expressed opposition to the inclusion of the office-based OUD services until CMS includes these codes in the Claim and Claim Line Feeds (CCLFs) provided to ACOs and further advocated for CMS to provide them with timely, actionable patient data, including data for Substance Use Disorder (SUD), to ACOs. One commenter described ACOs as still lacking access to vital SUD-related data on their patients due to the fact that under current regulations, care coordination is not considered by CMS to fall under treatment, payment, and health care operations. This commenter stated the CARES Act allows sharing of this important data after initial patient consent, which will allow CMS to deliver this critical information to providers operating in ACOs.

Response: As described at § 425.708(c), in accordance with 42 U.S.C. 290dd-2 and the implementing regulations at 42 CFR part 2, CMS does not share beneficiary identifiable claims data relating to the diagnosis and treatment of alcohol and substance abuse without the explicit written consent of the beneficiary. As we explained in the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32741), beneficiary identifiable information that is made available under § 425.704 would include Parts A, B and D data, but would exclude any information related to the diagnosis and treatment of alcohol or substance abuse. As we discussed in the April 2011 proposed rule (76 FR 19557), 42 U.S.C. 290dd-2 and the implementing regulations at 42 CFR part 2 restrict the disclosure of patient records by federally conducted or assisted substance abuse programs. Such data may be disclosed only with the prior written consent of the patient, or as otherwise provided in the statute and regulations. To assist ACOs in identifying the best sources for beneficiary medical record data, we provide the ACO with the TIN and NPI of the ACO participant and ACO professionals that provided the most recent primary care service to the beneficiary on each quarterly report. We also provide ACOs deidentified aggregate information related to substance use that may be helpful for understanding their patient population as described in § 425.702. We encourage ACOs and ACO participants to establish their own processes to access patients' health information directly, in accordance with applicable laws for purposes of care coordination.

As stated in the proposed rule, the OUD bundle HCPCS codes G2086, G2087, and G2088 have similar uses and requirements as other services that are included in our definition of primary care services, such as CCM, BHI, CoCM and alcohol misuse screening and counseling services and as such are appropriate to be included in the definition of primary care services for purposes of beneficiary assignment. Specifically, these services include the overall management and care coordination of beneficiaries being treated for SUD in an office setting.

Comment: Some commenters supported the proposal to include remote physiologic monitoring (RPM) CPT codes 99457 and 99458 and stated their belief that inclusion of these codes builds on support already provided for digital health (for example, adding G2012 and G2252 codes for virtual check-ins). One commenter stated that RPM enables providers to gain a comprehensive understanding of the patients' conditions while at home, facilitating more coordinated and engaged care efforts, which is particularly useful for patients who may have transportation or other barriers to frequent primary care access. One commenter added in their support for inclusion of RPM codes that include remote physiologic and therapeutic monitoring, artificial intelligence, and other tools. Another commenter stated that the proposed inclusion of RPM codes as primary care services for purposes of assignment, similar to how other CCM codes are so included, further aligns remote care and communication and aids in advancing RPM into value-based care models. This commenter welcomes this technical policy fix and appreciates that we have not “precluded furnishing and billing for the full range of RPM codes while gaining provider/patient entry into shared savings.” This commenter does ask that we clarify whether the intent is solely to track these services for assignment and eligibility for shared savings, which they state could fall short in expanding the use of RPM in the Shared Savings Program. One commenter stated support for the inclusion of RPM since the devices involved in these codes and the clinicians who read the results are important elements in patient care and care management services but urged CMS to reexamine and clarify the assignment methodology to ensure that third-party device companies and specialists who use the devices involved in these codes do not inadvertently impact Shared Savings Program attribution, cautioning that when these devices are billed by clinicians who do not provide a beneficiary's primary care services, it is important that those billing codes are not used to assign a beneficiary or remove a them from their primary care provider's assignment list. Many commenters supported the inclusion of the RPM services but expressed concern that these codes can also be billed by specialists and that CMS should monitor the billing of RPM to ensure their addition is not shifting beneficiary attribution away from primary care relationships in favor of specialty care.

Many commenters recommended that CMS not include RPM services in the definition of primary care services used for purposes of assignment. One commenter stated that while these codes may be billed by primary care providers to support the overall management of a patient's care, the codes can also be billed by specialists and can only be billed by one treating provider for a given patient. Therefore, if a specialist is billing these codes to support management of a specific condition, that patient's primary care provider would not be able to also provide RPM treatment management services to the patient. One commenter also stated that since these services are billed monthly, the allowed charges for RPM services furnished by a specialist could surpass the allowed charges for primary care services furnished by the primary care provider. A few commenters suggested the proposal to add RPM be terminated, or not finalized, since not all groups/clinicians who utilize these codes contribute to an ACO's population health practice, or initiatives to care for its patients. One commenter, while universally supportive of an expanded set of primary care services, cited their analysis that showed that RPM has an uptake by certain physician specialties (that is, cardiology) and recommended that CMS monitor utilization to ensure that the specialty of clinicians continues to be considered in determining whether a service is considered to be a primary care service for purposes of beneficiary assignment. This commenter further stated that many cardiologists are enrolled in Medicare under an internal medicine specialty but function as a cardiologist. Since internal medicine is one of the specialties identified as a primary care physician in step 1 of the Shared Savings Program assignment methodology while cardiologists are not included until step 2, this could result in inappropriate assignment under the Shared Savings Program. With the continued proliferation of care management services, this commenter also urged CMS to monitor utilization to ensure clinician specialty is considered in determining whether a service is considered to be a qualifying primary care service for purposes of beneficiary assignment. Another commenter cautioned against using RPM for ACO assignment given the significant rise in its use among certain medical specialties. They stated that, while well intended, addition of this service code could result in increased beneficiary churn and assignment of beneficiaries who do not have a true primary care relationship with ACO professionals in the ACO. Some commenters recommended that CMS collect experience from ACOs before adding RPM to the list of services used in assignment. They noted that they believe that it has the potential to “pull attribution away from ACO providers” and could attribute more patients based on services received from specialists due to the quantity of billing done for specific chronic conditions and the amounts of those bills.

A few commenters expressed concern about the intended purpose of including RPM codes in the definition of primary care services used for assignment. One commenter noted that they believe that if reimbursement for these codes counts “towards the ACO's benchmark for purposes of determining whether the ACO is eligible for shared savings,” it could be a disincentive for some practitioners to order these services. This commenter suggested that services billed under RPM and Remote Therapeutic Monitoring codes be reimbursable to providers that participate in an ACO without the cost of services billed under the codes being factored into the determination of an ACO's eligibility for shared savings.

Response: We are persuaded by comments concerned about or opposed to adding RPM services to the definition of primary care services for purposes of assignment, and thus are not finalizing the proposed inclusion of CPT codes 99457 and 99458 for RPM services in the definition of primary care services. As commenters stated, while these services can be billed for both primary and specialty care, the services can only be billed by one provider in a 30-day period and are more often billed by specialty providers. As a result, including these codes in the definition of primary care services for purposes of assignment could inappropriately impact the determination of where a beneficiary received a plurality of their primary care services.

After further consideration, we believe that it would be inappropriate to include these services in the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment in the Shared Savings Program. Although we are not finalizing our proposal to add RPM services to the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment, we do want to clarify that these services will be reflected in the calculation of expenditures for ACO-assigned beneficiaries for each benchmark year and each performance year. 246

246 See Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications (version #11, January 2023), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-2 (see section 3.1, “Calculating ACO-Assigned Beneficiary Expenditures”).

Comment: One commenter responded to our solicitation of comments on any other existing HCPCS or CPT codes and new HCPCS or CPT codes proposed elsewhere in the proposed rule that we should consider adding to the definition of primary care services for purposes of assignment in future rulemaking. This commenter urged us to include Care Management Services for Behavioral Health Conditions HCPCS code G0323 in the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment, as it is not only similar to services already included in the definition, such as BHI services (codes 99484, 99492, 99493 and 99494) and HCPCS code G2214 for psychiatric collaborative care model, it would also help recognize the participation of clinical psychologists in the Shared Savings Program.

Response: We agree that HCPCS code G0323 is a BHI service; however, this code describes general BHI that a clinical psychologist or clinical social worker performs to account for monthly care integration. 247 Under section 1899(c)(1)(A) of the Act, beneficiaries must be assigned to an ACO based on their receipt of primary care services furnished by an ACO professional who is a physician (as defined in section 1861(r)(1)) of the Act), or a practitioner that is a PA, NP, CNS (as defined in section 1842(b)(18)(C)(i) of the Act). We continue to believe that assigning beneficiaries to ACOs based on their receipt of primary care services furnished by an ACO professional who is a physician, and in addition, based on their receipt of primary care services furnished by a PA, NP, or CNS, consistent with the definition in § 425.20 of an ACO professional, is consistent with requirements of the Act. Section 1899 of the Act does not specifically allow for assignment of beneficiaries to an ACO based on their receipt of primary care services from clinical social workers or clinical psychologists (as defined in sections 1842(b)(18)(C)(iv) and 1842(b)(18)(C)(v) of the Act).

247 Medicare Learning Network (MLN909432, May 2023) Behavioral Health Integration Services, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/mln909432-behavioral-health-integration-services.pdf.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing a revised definition of primary care services in a new provision of the Shared Savings Program regulations at § 425.400(c)(1)(viii) to include the list of HCPCS and CPT codes specified in § 425.400(c)(1)(vii) along with the following additions: CPT codes 99406 and 99407; 96202 and 96203; and 9X015, 9X016, and 9X017 (which are being finalized as 97550, 97551, and 97552, respectively) and HCPCS codes G0101; G2086, G2087, and G2088; G2211; GXXX1 and GXXX2 (which are being finalized as G0019 and G0022, respectively) and; GXXX3 and GXXX4 (which are being finalized as G0023 and G0024, respectively); and GXXX5 (which is being finalized as G0136), as discussed in the preceding paragraphs. We are not finalizing our proposal to include CPT codes 99457 and 99458. We are finalizing as proposed that the new provision at § 425.400(c)(1)(viii) would be applicable for use in determining beneficiary assignment for the performance year starting on January 1, 2024, and subsequent performance years.

In section II.E of this final rule, certain code descriptions are being finalized with revisions:

(1) G0019 Community health integration (CHI) services performed by certified or trained auxiliary personnel including a community health worker, under the direction of a physician or other practitioner; 60 minutes per calendar month, in the following activities to address social determinants of health (SDOH) need(s) that are significantly limiting ability to diagnose or treat problem(s) addressed in an initiating E/M visit:

• Person-centered assessment, performed to better understand the individualized context of the intersection between the SDOH need(s) and problem(s) addressed in the initiating E/M visit.

++ Conducting a person-centered assessment to understand patient's life story, strengths, needs, goals, preferences and desired outcomes, including understanding cultural and linguistic factors.

++ Facilitating patient-driven goal-setting and establishing an action plan.

++ Providing tailored support to the patient as needed to accomplish the practitioner's treatment plan.

• Practitioner, Home, and Community-Based Care Coordination

++ Coordinating receipt of needed services from healthcare practitioners, providers, and facilities; and from home- and community-based service providers, social service providers, and caregiver (if applicable).

++ Communication with practitioners, home- and community-based service providers, hospitals, and skilled nursing facilities (or other health care facilities) regarding the patient's psychosocial strengths and needs, functional deficits, goals, preferences, and desired outcomes, including cultural and linguistic factors.

++ Coordination of care transitions between and among health care practitioners and settings, including transitions involving referrals to other clinicians; follow-up after an emergency department visit; or follow-up after discharges from hospitals, skilled nursing facilities or other health care facilities.

++ Facilitating access to community-based social services (e.g., housing, utilities, transportation, food assistance) to address SDOH need(s).

• Health education- Helping the patient contextualize health education provided by the patient's treatment team with the patient's individual needs, goals, and preferences, in the context of the SDOH need(s), and educating the patient on how to best participate in medical decision-making.

• Building patient self-advocacy skills, so that the patient can interact with members of the health care team and related community-based services addressing the SDOH need(s), in ways that are more likely to promote personalized and effective diagnosis and treatment.

• Health care access/health system navigation:

++ Helping the patient access care, including identifying appropriate practitioners or providers for clinical care and helping secure appointments with them.

• Facilitating behavioral change as necessary for meeting diagnosis and treatment goals, including promoting patient motivation to participate in care and reach person-centered diagnosis or treatment goals.

• Facilitating and providing social and emotional support to help the patient cope with the problem(s) addressed in the initiating visit, the SDOH need(s), and adjust daily routines to better meet diagnosis and treatment goals.

• Leveraging lived experience when applicable to provide support, mentorship, or inspiration to meet treatment goals.

(2) G0023 Principal Illness Navigation services by certified or trained auxiliary personnel under the direction of a physician or other practitioner, including a patient navigator or certified peer specialist; 60 minutes per calendar month, in the following activities:

• Person-centered assessment, performed to better understand the individualized context of the serious, high-risk condition.

++ Conducting a person-centered assessment to understand the patient's life story, needs, goals, preferences, and desired outcomes, including understanding cultural and linguistic factors and including unmet SDOH needs (that are not separately billed).

++ Facilitating patient-driven goal setting and creating an action plan.

++ Providing tailored support as needed to accomplish the practitioner's treatment plan.

• Identifying or referring patient (and caregiver or family, if applicable) to appropriate supportive services.

• Practitioner, Home, and Community-Based Care Coordination

++ Coordinating receipt of needed services from healthcare practitioners, providers and facilities; home-, and community-based service providers; and caregiver (if applicable).

++ Communication with practitioners, home-, and community-based service providers, hospitals, and skilled nursing facilities (or other health care facilities) regarding the patient's psychosocial strengths and needs, functional deficits, goals, and preferences, including cultural and linguistic factors.

++ Coordination of care transitions between and among health care practitioners and settings, including transitions involving referrals to other clinicians; follow-up after an emergency department visit; or follow-up after discharges from hospitals, skilled nursing facilities or other health care facilities.

++ Facilitating access to community-based social services (e.g., housing, utilities, transportation, food assistance) as needed to address SDOH need(s).

• Health education—Helping the patients contextualize health education provided by the patient's treatment team with the patient's individual needs, goals, preferences, and SDOH need(s), and educating the patient (and caregiver, if applicable) on how to best participate in medical decision-making.

• Building patient self-advocacy skills, so that the patient can interact with members of the health care team and related community-based services (as needed), in ways that are more likely to promote personalized and effective treatment of their condition.

• Health care access/health system navigation.

++ Helping the patient access healthcare, identifying appropriate practitioners or providers for clinical care and helping secure appointments with them.

++ Providing the patient with information/resources to consider participation in clinical trials or clinical research as applicable.

• Facilitating behavioral change necessary for meeting diagnosis and treatment goals, including promoting patient motivation to participate in care and reach person-centered diagnosis or treatment goals.

• Facilitating and providing social and emotional support for the patient to help the patient cope with the condition, SDOH need(s), and adjust daily routines to better meet diagnosis or treatment goals.

• Leverage knowledge of the serious, high-risk condition and/or lived experience when applicable to provide support, mentorship, or inspiration to meet treatment goals.

4. Benchmarking Methodology

a. Overview

In section III.G.4 of the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52456 through 52483), we proposed modifications to the benchmarking methodology under the Shared Savings Program. We proposed a combination of modifications to the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology to encourage sustained participation by ACOs in the program. Specifically, we proposed to revise the benchmarking methodology by modifying the existing calculation of the regional update factor used to update the historical benchmark between benchmark year (BY) 3 and the performance year (section III.G.4.b of the proposed rule). We also proposed to further mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustment to the historical benchmark (section III.G.4.c of the proposed rule). Additionally, we proposed refinements to the prior savings adjustment calculation methodology (section III.G.4.d of the proposed rule), that would apply in the establishment of benchmarks for renewing ACOs and re-entering ACOs entering an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, to account for the following: a change in savings earned by the ACO in a benchmark year due to compliance action taken to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or a change in the amount of savings or losses for a benchmark year as a result of issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315. Finally, we proposed to specify in the regulations an approach to calculating prospective HCC risk scores used in Shared Savings Program benchmark calculations, applicable for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, in which we would use the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) applicable to the calendar year corresponding to the performance year to calculate a Medicare FFS beneficiary's prospective HCC risk score for the performance year, and for each benchmark year of the ACO's agreement period (section III.G.4.e of the proposed rule). Our specific proposals are discussed in detail in the following sections.

b. Cap Regional Service Area Risk Score Growth for Symmetry With ACO Risk Score Cap

(1) Background

In the June 2016 final rule (81 FR 37977 through 37981), we established a policy of utilizing a regional growth rate to update the benchmark annually. In that rule, we finalized a policy that, for ACOs in their second or subsequent agreement period whose rebased historical benchmark incorporates an adjustment to reflect regional expenditures, the annual update to the benchmark would be calculated as a growth rate that reflects growth in risk adjusted regional per beneficiary FFS spending for the ACO's regional service area, for each of the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible (refer to § 425.603(d)).

In proposing and finalizing the regional growth rate policy, we explained that incorporating regional expenditures in the benchmark would make the ACO's cost target more independent of its historical expenditures and more reflective of FFS spending in its region. We also explained that the use of regional trend factors to trend forward BY1 and BY2 to BY3 in resetting ACO benchmarks and regional growth rates used to update the historical benchmark to the performance year annually would likely result in relatively higher benchmarks for ACOs that are low growth relative to their region compared to benchmarks for ACOs that are high growth relative to their region (refer to 81 FR 37955).

In the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68013 through 68031), we finalized a proposal to use a blend of national and regional trend factors to trend forward BY1 and BY2 to BY3 when determining the historical benchmark and a blend of national and regional update factors to update the historical benchmark to the performance year for all agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019 (refer to § 425.601(a) and (b)). Under this policy, the national component of the blended trend and update factors receives a weight equal to the share of assignable beneficiaries in the regional service area that are assigned to the ACO, computed by taking a weighted average of county-level shares. The regional component of the blended trend and update factors receives a weight equal to 1 minus the national weight. Calculations are made separately for each Medicare enrollment type. In the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68024), we acknowledged that, for an ACO that serves a high proportion of beneficiaries in select counties making up its regional service area (referred to herein as having “high market share”), a purely regional trend would be more influenced by the ACO's own expenditure patterns, making it more difficult for the ACO to outperform its benchmark and conflicting with our goal to move ACOs away from benchmarks based solely on their own historical costs. Incorporating national trends that are more independent of an ACO's own performance was therefore intended to reduce the influence of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries on the ultimate blended trend and update factors applied.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69881 through 69899), we finalized a policy for agreement periods starting on or after January 1, 2024, under which we will update the historical benchmark between BY3 and the performance year for each year of the agreement period using a three-way blend calculated as a weighted average of a two-way blend of national and regional growth rates determined after the end of each performance year and a fixed projected growth rate determined at the beginning of the ACO's agreement period called the Accountable Care Prospective Trend (ACPT) (refer to § 425.652(b)). Under this policy, we will make separate calculations for expenditure categories for each Medicare enrollment type. We explained that incorporating this prospective trend in the update to the benchmark would insulate a portion of the annual update from any savings occurring as a result of the actions of ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program and address the impact of increasing market penetration by ACOs in a regional service area on the existing blended national-regional growth factor.

For ACOs in agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years, we account for changes in severity and case mix of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population when establishing the benchmark for an agreement period and also in adjusting the benchmark for each performance year during the agreement period. In accordance with § 425.601(a)(3) and § 425.652(a)(3), in establishing the benchmark, we adjust expenditures for changes in severity and case mix using CMS Hierarchical Condition Category (CMS-HCC) prospective risk scores (herein referred to as prospective HCC risk scores). Pursuant to § 425.601(a)(10) and § 425.652(a)(10), we further adjust the ACO's historical benchmark at the time of reconciliation for a performance year to account for changes in severity and case mix for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year (refer to § 425.605(a)(1), (a)(2); § 425.610(a)(2), (a)(3)). In performing this risk adjustment, we make separate adjustments for the population of assigned beneficiaries in each Medicare enrollment type used in the Shared Savings Program (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible).

As finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69932 through 69946), for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024, we will use prospective HCC risk scores to adjust the historical benchmark for changes in severity and case mix for all assigned beneficiaries between BY3 and the performance year, with positive adjustments subject to a cap equal to the ACO's aggregate growth in demographic risk scores between BY3 and the performance year plus 3 percentage points (herein referred to as the “aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap”) (refer to § 425.605(a)(1)(ii); § 425.610(a)(2)(ii)). This cap applies only if the ACO's aggregate growth in prospective HCC risk scores between BY3 and the performance year across all of the Medicare enrollment types (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible) exceeds this cap. If the cap is determined to apply, the value of the cap is the maximum increase in prospective HCC risk scores (expressed as a ratio of the ACO's performance year risk score to the ACO's BY3 risk score) for the applicable performance year, such that any positive adjustment between BY3 and the performance year cannot be larger than the value of the aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap for any of the Medicare enrollment types. This cap is applied separately for the population of beneficiaries in each Medicare enrollment type.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we further explained that we were finalizing the aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap to address concerns with the prior approach to risk adjustment, which used prospective HCC risk scores to adjust the historical benchmark for changes in severity and case mix for all assigned beneficiaries between BY3 and the performance year, subject to a cap of positive 3 percent for the agreement period that was applied separately by Medicare enrollment type (referred to herein as the “3 percent cap”) (refer to § 425.605(a)(1)(i); § 425.610(a)(2)(i)). The 3 percent cap was finalized through the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68013) and is applicable to ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, and prior to January 1, 2024.

We believe that the aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap addresses several concerns raised by interested parties 248 about the 3 percent cap by: accounting for higher volatility in prospective HCC risk scores for certain Medicare enrollment types due to smaller sample sizes; allowing for higher benchmarks than the prior risk adjustment methodology for ACOs that care for larger proportions of beneficiaries in aged/dual eligible, disabled and ESRD enrollment types (which are frequently subject to the 3 percent cap); and continuing to safeguard the Trust Funds by limiting returns from coding initiatives. However, the demographics plus 3 percent cap does not address concerns from certain interested parties that the current policy places a cap on an ACO's risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year but does not place a cap on the regional prospective HCC risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year, which is reflected in the regional growth rate used to calculate the update factor (pursuant to § 425.652(b)(2)(ii)). 249

248 For summaries of these concerns of interested parties, refer to the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65302 through 65306), CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69932 through 69934).

249 For summaries of these concerns of interested parties, refer to the CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84783 through 84785), the CY 2022 PFS final rule (86 FR 65302 through 65306), and the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 66942 and 69943).

Under the methodology finalized in CY 2023 PFS final rule, as described in § 425.652(b), we express the regional update factor, used to update the historical benchmark to the performance year, as the ratio of an ACO's performance year regional service area risk adjusted expenditures to its BY3 regional service area risk adjusted expenditures for each Medicare enrollment type. Table 36 provides a numeric example of the current methodology for calculating the regional update factor for the ESRD Medicare enrollment type for a hypothetical ACO with a regional service area that includes counties A, B, C, and D.

Under § 425.654, an ACO's regional expenditures are calculated using risk adjusted county FFS expenditures. The counties included in the ACO's regional service area are based on the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for the applicable benchmark or performance year. We determine average county FFS expenditures based on expenditures for the assignable population 250 of beneficiaries in each county in the ACO's regional service area. We make separate calculations for each Medicare enrollment type. We adjust these county-level FFS expenditures (refer to Table 36, rows [A] and [F]) for severity and case mix of assignable beneficiaries in the county using county-level prospective HCC risk scores (refer to Table 36, rows [B] and [G]). The adjustment is made by dividing the county-level FFS expenditures for the Medicare enrollment type by county-level prospective HCC risk scores for the Medicare enrollment type, resulting in risk adjusted county-level FFS expenditures shown in Table 36 rows [C] and [H].

250 Assignable beneficiary expenditures are calculated using the payment amounts included in Parts A and B FFS claims with dates of service in the 12-month calendar year that corresponds to the relevant benchmark or performance year, using a 3-month claims run out with a completion factor. These expenditure calculations exclude IME and DSH payments, and the supplemental payment for IHS/Tribal hospitals and Puerto Rico hospitals; and consider individually beneficiary identifiable final payments made under a demonstration, pilot or time limited program. Refer to § 425.654(a)(2). The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for the assignment window corresponding to the relevant benchmark or performance year that is consistent with the assignment window that applies under the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii). Refer to § 425.654(a)(1)(i). We refer readers to the discussion of the proposed changes to the methodology for identifying the assignable beneficiary population in section III.G.3.a of the proposed rule.

We then calculate an ACO's regional expenditures for each Medicare enrollment type by weighting these risk adjusted county-level FFS expenditures according to the ACO's proportion of assigned beneficiaries 251 in the county for that Medicare enrollment type (refer to Table 36, rows [D] and [I]), determined by the number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries in the applicable population (according to Medicare enrollment type) residing in the county in relation to the ACO's total number of assigned beneficiaries in the applicable population (according to Medicare enrollment type) for the relevant benchmark or performance year. We then aggregate those values for each population of beneficiaries (according to Medicare enrollment type) across all counties within the ACO's regional service area 252 (refer to Table 36, rows [E] and [J]).

251 Proportions are calculated using beneficiary person years.

252 Refer to the Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications (version #11, January 2023), sections 4.1.1 “Determining Regional FFS Expenditures” and 4.1.4 “Risk Adjusting and Updating the Historical Benchmark”, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-2 .

We then calculate the regional update factor as the ratio of an ACO's performance year expenditures to BY3 regional expenditures. This calculation is performed separately for each Medicare enrollment type. Refer to Table 36, row [K] for an example of how the regional update factor would be calculated for the ESRD Medicare enrollment type. This calculation would then be repeated for each of the other Medicare enrollment types.

While the regional expenditures for BY3 and the performance year are risk adjusted, as described previously in this section, there is currently no cap on prospective HCC risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area between BY3 and the performance year. As discussed previously in this section, ACOs and other interested parties have expressed concerns that the program's current cap on ACO risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year does not account for risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area and that there is not an equivalent cap on regional risk score growth. High prospective HCC risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area between BY3 and the performance year has the effect of decreasing the regional update factor, resulting in a lower updated benchmark for the ACO than if the regional risk score growth was capped (assuming that the risk score growth was high enough to be capped). In past rulemaking, some commenters have encouraged CMS to adopt a policy of applying a cap on ACO risk score growth after accounting for regional increase in risk scores. 253 Others have suggested more generally that CMS align the use of a risk adjustment cap for the ACO and its region by applying a consistent capping policy to both. 254

253 Refer to CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84784).

254 Refer to CY 2021 PFS final rule (85 FR 84784) and CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69943).

In the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule (86 FR 39294 through 39295), we sought comment on an alternate approach to capping ACO prospective HCC risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year in relation to the prospective HCC risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area. The option we presented was to allow an ACO's risk score growth cap to increase above 3 percent by a percentage of the difference between the 3 percent cap and risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area for a given Medicare enrollment type. In this alternate approach (herein referred to as the “3 percent cap plus regional difference”), the percentage applied would be equal to 1 minus the ACO's regional market share for the Medicare enrollment type. For example, if regional risk score growth for a particular Medicare enrollment type was 5 percent and the ACO's regional market share was 20 percent, we would increase the cap on the ACO's risk score growth for that Medicare enrollment type by an amount equal to the difference between the regional risk score growth and the 3 percent cap (2 percent) multiplied by one minus the ACO's regional market share (80 percent). Thus, the ACO would face a cap for this Medicare enrollment type equal to 4.6 percent instead of 3 percent (3 percent + (2 percent × 80 percent)). This approach would raise the 3 percent cap while limiting the ability for ACOs with high market share to increase their cap by engaging in coding intensity initiatives that raise the regional prospective HCC risk score. As discussed in the CY 2022 PFS final rule, a few commenters noted their support for this 3 percent cap plus regional difference methodology. 255 However, MedPAC expressed concern that increasing the cap beyond 3 percent could effectively reward ACOs for greater coding intensity in their region, particularly for those with higher market share. 256 257

255 Refer to 86 FR 65304.

256 Refer to 86 FR 65303 through 65305. 257 Refer to Letter from MedPAC to Chiquita Brooks-LaSure, Administrator, CMS (September 9, 2021), regarding File code CMS-1751-P (pages 16-18 “Risk adjustment methodology”), available at https://www.medpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/09092021_PartB_CMS1751_MedPAC_Comment_V2_SEC.pdf .

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69932 through 69946), we indicated that we had considered the 3 percent cap plus regional difference methodology described in the CY 2022 PFS proposed rule when developing policies for the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule. However, we opted not to propose this policy and instead proposed, and ultimately finalized, the aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap. One reason we did not propose the 3 percent cap plus regional difference was that a relatively small share of ACOs affected by the 3 percent cap operated in regional service areas where regional risk score growth was greater than 3 percent, indicating that this was not a widespread issue impacting ACO performance. Additionally, we explained that we still had concerns that allowing the cap on an ACO's risk score growth to increase with regional risk score growth could incentivize ACOs, particularly those with high market share, to engage in coding behavior that would increase their cap, even if this incentive would be mitigated to some degree by limiting the allowable increase in the cap based on the ACO's market share. Under the 3 percent cap, ACOs with high market share have a disincentive to engage in coding initiatives, as it could increase risk score growth in their regional service area and potentially decrease the value of the regional component of their update factor. We noted that raising the 3 percent cap based on risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area could change these incentives and encourage ACOs to engage in coding initiatives. In addition to finalizing the aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap, in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we noted that we declined to consider an approach that would impose a direct cap on risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area (87 FR 69932 through 69947). As with the 3 percent cap plus regional difference, we were concerned that such an approach would create adverse incentives for coding behavior, especially for ACOs with high market share.

In response to the discussion of the cap on prospective HCC risk score growth in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule, commenters took the opportunity to reiterate their concerns that the program's current cap on ACO risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year does not account for risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area and suggested ways to incorporate a cap on regional risk score growth. A couple of commenters requested that the risk score cap be allowed to further increase for ACOs in regions where risk score growth exceeds the cap, with one stating that a flat percentage cap will always disadvantage ACOs in regions where risk score growth exceeds the cap and another stating that this additional flexibility would ensure ACOs are not disadvantaged by operating in underserved communities. Additionally, many commenters supported capping regional risk score growth in addition to capping ACO risk score growth. Several of those commenters stated that it was critical that, whatever policy CMS adopted for capping ACOs' risk score growth, the same policy must also apply to regional risk score growth. Several commenters noted that CMS should not apply adjustments to only one side of the equation, that is, capping ACO risk ratios without capping regional risk ratios, with many commenters saying this would lead to unintended consequences and another commenter stated it would have inequitable results. Several commenters stated that not capping increases in regional risk scores would stifle growth in exactly the areas CMS wants growth the most. A few commenters explained that lack of regional risk score growth caps incentivizes ACOs not to grow in places with certain types of populations, such as those with increasing health burdens, higher needs, or higher numbers of aged/dual and disabled enrollees. 258 In response to these comments, we indicated that we would continue to monitor the impacts of regional risk score growth and might propose further refinements to our risk adjustment policies in future rulemaking. 259

258 Refer to 87 FR 69942 through 69943.

259 Refer to 87 FR 69943.

(2) Revisions

Since the publication of the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we have performed further analysis on prospective HCC risk score growth in ACOs' regional service area between BY3 and the performance year and considered ways in which we could reduce impacts to ACOs in regions with high risk score growth, particularly when such growth is not due to the ACO's own complete and accurate coding, while also limiting the impact from coding initiatives, particularly among ACOs with high market share. Based on this additional analysis, which is detailed later in this section, in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52459 through 52465), we proposed to modify the calculation of the regional update factor used to update the historical benchmark between BY3 and the performance year. The proposed approach would cap prospective HCC risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area between BY3 and the performance year by applying an adjustment factor to the regional update factor. This cap on regional risk score growth would be applied independently of the cap on an ACO's own prospective HCC risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year, meaning that this proposed cap on prospective HCC risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area would be applied whether or not the ACO's prospective risk score growth was capped when updating the benchmark between BY3 and the performance year. We explained that applying these caps independently would be more equitable to ACOs serving high-risk patients in regions with high risk score growth and avoid creating incentives for ACOs to avoid high-risk and more medically complex patients. Adjusting the regional service area risk score growth cap based on the percentage of original Medicare FFS beneficiaries the ACO serves in the region would help to mitigate the impact an ACO's own coding initiatives have on risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area, particularly when the ACO has a greater influence on its regional service area risk score growth rate.

To determine the cap on prospective HCC risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area, we proposed to follow a similar methodology as the one adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule 260 for capping ACO risk score growth, codified at §§ 425.605(a)(1)(ii) and 425.610(a)(2)(ii), while additionally accounting for an ACO's aggregate market share. The effect of the regional risk score growth cap would be to increase the regional component of the update factor for ACOs in regions with aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth above the cap, with ACOs with higher aggregate market shares seeing smaller increases, all else being equal. ACOs in regions with aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth below the cap would not be affected by the proposed policy.

260 87 FR 69932 through 69946.

As we explained in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, by symmetrically limiting risk score growth within both an ACO's assigned beneficiary population and its region, this proposed approach is expected to improve the accuracy of the regional update factors for ACOs operating in regional service areas with high risk score growth, particularly in later years of the 5-year agreement period where the difference between an ACO's BY3 and performance year regional risk scores is expected to be the greatest. We explained our belief that capping regional risk score growth would strengthen incentives for ACOs to form or continue to operate in regions with high-risk score growth and thereby incentivize ACOs to care for higher risk beneficiaries. This approach would also offer an incentive for potential applicant ACOs that may be examining recent risk score growth in their region and making the decision whether to participate in the Shared Savings Program. Additionally, by adjusting the regional risk score growth cap based on ACO market share, we noted that the proposal would also maintain a disincentive against coding intensity for ACOs with high market share.

To implement the new cap on regional risk score growth, we proposed to multiply the original regional update factor used to update the historical benchmark between BY3 and the performance year (determined in accordance with § 425.652(b)(2)(ii)) by a regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor. The regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor would be calculated as follows:

• Step 1: Calculate county-level risk scores. We would calculate county-level prospective HCC and demographic risk scores by Medicare enrollment type for both BY3 and the performance year. To do this for a given benchmark or performance year, we would first determine the renormalized, prospective HCC and demographic risk score for each assignable beneficiary 261 in each county in the ACO's regional service area. For both HCC and demographic risk scores, we would then compute the weighted average risk score for each county for each Medicare enrollment type by multiplying each assignable beneficiary's risk score for that Medicare enrollment type by the beneficiary's person years enrolled in that Medicare enrollment type, summing these weighted risk scores across all assignable beneficiaries for that Medicare enrollment type in the county, and then dividing by total person years for that Medicare enrollment type among assignable beneficiaries in the county. We noted that this approach would be similar to the approach that is currently used to determine county-level prospective HCC risk scores as an intermediate step in calculating risk adjusted regional expenditures under the current methodology. 262

261 Consistent with our proposal to revise the definition of an assignable beneficiary (refer to section III.G.3.a of the proposed rule), we proposed that the assignable population of beneficiaries for a benchmark or performance year would be identified using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the applicable performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

262 Refer to the Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications (version #11, January 2023), section 4.1.1 “Determining Regional FFS Expenditures”, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-2 .

• Step 2: Calculate regional risk scores. We would calculate regional-level BY3 and performance year prospective HCC and demographic risk scores as a weighted average of county-level HCC and demographic risk scores for the Medicare enrollment type (calculated in step 1), with weights reflecting the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries 263 in the county. This proportion is determined by the number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries (by Medicare enrollment type) residing in each county in relation to the ACO's total number of assigned beneficiaries for that Medicare enrollment type for the relevant benchmark or performance year. These would be the same weights as used to calculate regional expenditures under § 425.654(b).

263 Proportions are calculated using beneficiary person years.

• Step 3: Determine aggregate growth in regional risk scores. To calculate aggregate growth in regional risk scores, we would first calculate growth in prospective HCC and demographic risk scores between BY3 and the performance year for each Medicare enrollment type, expressed as the ratio of the performance year regional risk score for a Medicare enrollment type (calculated in step 2) to the BY3 regional risk score for that enrollment type (calculated in step 2). We would next take a weighted average of the regional prospective HCC or demographic risk ratios, as applicable, across the four Medicare enrollment types, where the weight applied to the growth in risk scores for each Medicare enrollment type would be the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary person years for the Medicare enrollment type multiplied by the ACO's regionally adjusted historical benchmark expenditures for the Medicare enrollment type. 264

264 These are the same weights that are to be used when calculating weighted average ACO prospective HCC and demographic risk ratios under the risk adjustment methodology adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69932 through 69946) and codified in §§ 425.605(a)(1)(ii)(C) and 425.610(a)(2)(ii)(C).

• Step 4: Determine the cap on regional risk score growth. We would first calculate the non-market share adjusted cap on the ACO's regional risk score growth as the sum of the aggregate growth in regional demographic risk scores (calculated in step 3) and 3 percentage points. 265

265 This is similar to the calculation of the cap on ACO prospective HCC risk score growth finalized in the CY 2023 PFS (87 FR 69932 through 69946) and codified in §§ 425.605(a)(1)(ii)(A) and 425.610(a)(2)(ii)(A).

We would next adjust the cap to reflect the ACO's aggregate market share. We would calculate an ACO's aggregate market share as a weighted average of the ACO's market share across the four Medicare enrollment types. An ACO's market share for each Medicare enrollment type would be equal to the weight that is applied to the national component of the blended update factor in the two-way blend that is calculated as the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO for the applicable performance year (refer to § 425.652(b)(2)(iv)). The weights for each Medicare enrollment type used to compute the weighted average would be the ACO's performance year assigned person years for the Medicare enrollment type.

We would adjust the cap on regional risk score growth to reflect the ACO's aggregate market share by adding to the non-market share adjusted cap the product of:

++ The ACO's aggregate market share, and

++ The difference (subject to a floor of zero) between:

—The aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth (calculated in step 3), and

—The non-market share adjusted cap (calculated first in this step).

This adjustment of the cap on regional risk score growth using the ACO's aggregate market share creates a sliding scale. Assuming that an ACO has aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth above the non-market share adjusted cap, an ACO with close to 0 percent aggregate market share would receive a market share adjusted cap on regional risk score growth close to the aggregate growth in regional demographic risk scores plus 3 percentage points and an ACO with 100 percent aggregate market share would receive a market share adjusted cap on regional risk score growth equal to the aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth calculated in step 3 (which is effectively no cap at all). Under this approach, as an ACO's aggregate market share increases, so does the cap on the ACO's regional risk score growth, ultimately limiting the potential increase to the regional update factor for ACOs with high market share.

• Step 5: Determine the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor. First, we would determine if the ACO's regional risk score growth is subject to a cap by comparing the ACO's aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth (calculated in step 3) to the market share adjusted cap on regional risk score growth (calculated in step 4).

++ If the aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth does not exceed the cap on regional risk score growth, the ACO's regional risk score growth would not be subject to the cap. For these ACOs we would set the risk score growth cap adjustment factor equal to 1 for each Medicare enrollment type (which is effectively no adjustment).

++ If the aggregate regional prospective HCC risk score growth exceeds the market share adjusted cap, the ACO's regional risk score growth is subject to the cap. For these ACOs we would next determine whether the cap on regional risk score growth applies for each Medicare enrollment type. To do this, we would compare regional prospective HCC risk score growth for each Medicare enrollment type (calculated in step 3) with the market share adjusted cap (calculated in step 4). If the regional risk score growth for a Medicare enrollment type does not exceed the cap, the enrollment type is not subject to the cap and the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor for that Medicare enrollment type is set equal to 1 (effectively no adjustment). Otherwise, the Medicare enrollment type is subject to the cap and we would set the adjustment factor for the Medicare enrollment type equal to the regional prospective HCC risk score growth for the Medicare enrollment type (calculated in step 3) divided by the market share adjusted cap calculated in step 4. In this case, the adjustment factor for the Medicare enrollment type would represent a measure of how far above the cap the regional prospective HCC risk score growth is.

Table 37 provides a numeric example of the calculation of the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor for a hypothetical ACO that is determined to be subject to the market share adjusted cap. Table 37 begins at the end of step 2 of the calculation, and therefore only reflects regional-level calculations and does not include the county-level calculations:

In this example, the hypothetical ACO was in a regional service area with aggregate prospective HCC risk score growth (a weighted average risk ratio of 1.039, refer to row [H]) above the market share adjusted cap of 1.021 (refer to row [N]). The ACO's regional prospective HCC risk score growth (shown in row [E]) was above this cap for three of the four Medicare enrollment types (all but the aged/dual eligible Medicare enrollment type). Therefore, the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor (refer to row [Q]) calculated for those three capped Medicare enrollment types was above one, and the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor calculated for the one uncapped Medicare enrollment type was equal to one. Once the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factors are multiplied by the original regional update factors used to update the historical benchmark between BY3 and the performance year, the regional update factor would increase for the three capped Medicare enrollment types. For example, if the original regional update factor for the ESRD Medicare enrollment type was 0.976, then the final regional ESRD update factor after the application of the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor would be 1.000 (the product of 0.976 and the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor of 1.025). There would be no change to the original regional update factor for the uncapped aged/dual eligible Medicare enrollment type as it would be multiplied by one. Because of the increase in original regional update factor for the three capped Medicare enrollment types, this hypothetical ACO would have a higher updated benchmark under this proposed policy than under current policy.

However, if an ACO was in a regional service area with aggregate prospective HCC risk score growth that was not above the regional risk score growth cap, the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor for all Medicare enrollment types would be equal to one, thus resulting in no change to the original regional update factor for any Medicare enrollment type, and therefore, no change to the ACO's updated benchmark compared to current policy.

As we described in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, this proposed policy would help increase the accuracy of the regional update factor for ACOs operating in regional service areas with high risk score growth, including those serving more medically complex beneficiaries, therefore increasing incentives for ACOs to form or continue participation in such areas. We further explained that incorporating the market share adjustment helps to mitigate concerns related to coding intensity for ACOs with high market share and thus a relatively high level of influence over risk scores in their regional service area as discussed in section III.G.4.b.(1) of the proposed rule, and therefore, would protect the Trust Funds by continuing to limit incentives for this behavior.

We simulated the impact of the proposed policy using PY 2021 financial reconciliation data for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019. This simulation found that 38 of the 332 ACOs (11 percent) would have been subject to the cap on regional risk score growth determined in step 4 of the proposed methodology, and therefore, would have had a higher regional update factor than under current policy for at least one Medicare enrollment type. Thirty-six of those 38 ACOs were subject to the 3 percent cap on their own risk score growth for at least one enrollment type in actual PY 2021 results. Table 38 shows the percentage of ACOs determined to be subject to the cap on regional risk score growth for each Medicare enrollment type and the average increase in the regional update factor for that enrollment type among those ACOs.

In the proposed rule, we explained that while this modeling shows that only a small proportion of ACOs would have benefitted from this policy in PY 2021, our analyses have also shown that this proportion is predicted to increase as more ACOs advance farther into their 5-year agreement period. This prediction was supported by the finding that ACOs in the simulation were significantly more likely to be impacted if their agreement period started in 2019 with a BY3 of 2018 (16 percent) than if their agreement period started in 2020 with a BY3 of 2019 (6 percent). 266 Because the analysis of PY 2021 data demonstrates that circumstances like the PHE for COVID-19 and progression along a 5-year agreement period can interact to increase the share of ACOs in regional service areas with aggregate regional risk score growth above the cap, we determined that our initial concerns about creating adverse incentives for coding behavior by capping regional risk score growth, as discussed in section III.G.4.b.(1) of the proposed rule, were outweighed by the potential harm to ACOs in regions with high risk score growth, particularly when such growth is not due to the ACO's own coding activities. Additionally, we stated that the market share adjustment to the cap on regional risk score growth would limit overly advantaging ACOs with high market share if they participate in coding initiatives.

266 While analysis of average FFS risk score changes at the hospital referral region (HRR) level further supports the assumption that more ACOs would be impacted toward the end of their 5-year agreement period, such analysis also indicates that variation from the PHE for COVID-19 likely accentuated this phenomenon in the simulation on PY2021 data. For this reason, the finding in the PY2021 simulation that 16 percent of 2019 starters were impacted is likely indicative of an upper bound for the share of ACOs potentially impacted by PY5 in agreement periods that start in 2024 or later (that is, where the impact of the PHE for COVID-19 on risk score growth between BY3 and the PY is minimal relative to risk score growth from 2018 to 2021 and from 2019 to 2021 in this simulation). This footnote has been revised, from footnote 187 in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52463), to clarify how findings from the PY 2021 simulation may be relevant in projecting risk score growth for agreement periods starting in 2024 or later.

Table 39 displays information on the impact of the market share adjustment on the cap on regional risk score growth within our simulation of the application of the proposed policy in PY 2021 for the ACOs with the minimum, median, and maximum aggregate market share that were found to be subject to the cap on regional risk score growth.

Based on this data in Table 39, the majority of ACOs found to be impacted in this simulation had a relatively small aggregate market share, with a median of about 13 percent. Because of this, the median increase to the cap on regional risk score growth from the market share adjustment was small (0.001). (This is both the median increase among all 38 impacted ACOs and the increase for the impacted ACOs with the median market share). Further analysis showed that results were similar among both rural and urban ACOs. Of the 38 impacted ACOs, 34 were classified as urban and had a median aggregate market share of about 12 percent. The remaining four impacted ACOs were rural ACOs with a median aggregate market share of about 24 percent. While the market share was higher on average among rural ACOs, average market share for both types of ACOs was under 25 percent and both groups had only a small median increase to the cap on regional risk score growth from the market share adjustment of 0.001. 267

267 For this analysis, ACOs were classified as rural if the plurality of their assigned beneficiaries resided in either micropolitan or noncore counties and urban if the plurality of their assigned beneficiaries resided in either large central metro, large fringe metro, medium metro, or small metro counties as defined by The United States Census Bureau and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).

ACOs with a larger aggregate market share received a larger increase in the cap on regional risk score growth due to the market share adjustment. For example, in Table 39, the ACO with the highest market share of 53.6 percent (an ACO that has a regional service area in an urban area), had a 20 percent increase in its cap from the market share adjustment, going from a non-market share adjusted cap of 1.008 to an adjusted cap of 1.028. As we explained in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, while the impact of the market share adjustment on the cap on regional risk score growth would be small for the majority of ACOs, this market share adjustment was important to address both our own concerns related to incentives for coding intensity and the similar concerns raised by MedPAC in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, as discussed in section III.G.4.b.(1) of the proposed rule. The market share adjustment to the cap limits the adverse coding incentives that can arise when allowing larger benchmark increases when an ACO increases its coding, especially for ACOs with high market share. Specifically, ACOs with high market share would still have a disincentive to engage in coding initiatives, as these initiatives could increase risk score growth in their regional service area and potentially decrease the value of the regional component of their update factor.

We explained that apart from the market share adjustment, the calculation of the proposed cap on regional risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year would be calculated in the same way as the aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap on ACO risk score growth under §§ 425.605(a)(1)(ii)(A) and 425.610(a)(2)(ii)(A). Specifically, the cap would be calculated as the aggregate growth in regional demographic risk scores between BY3 and the performance year plus 3 percentage points, prior to application of the market share adjustment. Additionally, we noted that as a result of incorporating the risk adjustment into the regional update factor at the county level, the current methodology does not directly calculate a regional risk ratio that can be directly modified. The proposed approach of modifying the regional update factor by multiplying by an adjustment factor would achieve the goal of reducing the impact of regional risk score growth while leaving the existing methodology for calculating risk-adjusted regional expenditures intact.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, we explained that in earlier rulemaking (see 87 FR 69887 and 69888) we have used our authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to adopt a three-way blended benchmark update factor (weighted one-third ACPT, and two-thirds national-regional blend) for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, in place of an update factor based on the projected absolute amount of growth in national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original FFS program as called for in section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act. We also acknowledged that the changes we were proposing to the regional component of the three-way blended update factor would similarly require continued use of our statutory authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act. Section 1899(i)(3) of the Act grants the Secretary the authority to use other payment models, including payment models that use alternative benchmarking methodologies, if the Secretary determines that doing so would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare program and program expenditures under the alternative methodology would be equal to or lower than those that would result under the statutory payment model. We explained our belief that the changes to the methodology for updating the benchmark that we were proposing pursuant to section 1899(i)(3) of the Act would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under the Medicare Program. More specifically, we explained our belief that the proposed changes to the regional component of the update factor would—in the context of the downward effects on the benchmark resulting from elevated variation in regional average prospective HCC risk score growth as shown in the PY 2021 analysis—reinforce the incentive for ACOs to enter and remain in the Shared Savings Program, particularly in regions with changing populations. Moreover, we stated our belief that the proposed approach, by encouraging ACOs to enter and continue participation in the Shared Savings Program, would lead to improvement in the quality of care furnished to Medicare FFS beneficiaries because participating ACOs have an incentive to perform well on quality measures in order to maximize the shared savings they may receive. In addition, as discussed in the Regulatory Impact Analysis (section VII. of the proposed rule), it was our belief that the proposed changes to the regional component of the three-way blended update factor, in combination with the other proposals for which we were required to use our authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act, would result in a marginal impact that we estimated would result in $330 million in lower net spending over the 10-year projection window, which supported our finding that the relatively minor changes to program spending resulting from these proposed changes would not violate the requirements of section 1899(i)(3)(B) of the Act. We stated that we would continue to reexamine this projection in the future to ensure that the requirement under section 1899(i)(3)(B) of the Act that an alternative payment model not result in additional program expenditures continues to be satisfied. In the event that we later determine that the payment model established under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act no longer meets this requirement, we would undertake additional notice and comment rulemaking to make adjustments to the payment model to assure continued compliance with the statutory requirements.

We proposed to revise the Shared Savings Program regulations governing the calculation of the regional growth rate when updating the historical benchmark between BY3 and the performance year at § 425.652(b)(2)(ii)(C) to incorporate a regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor. (In the preamble of the CY 2024 proposed rule (88 FR 52465), we inadvertently referred to § 425.652(c) instead of § 425.652(b)(2)(ii)(C); however, the proposed changes to the regulations text correctly reflected the intended revisions to § 425.652(b)(2)(ii)(C).) We also proposed to add a new section to the regulations at § 425.655 to describe the calculation of the adjustment factor.

We solicited comments on the proposed changes to calculation of the regional component of the update factor for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024.

We received public comments on this proposal. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: Many commenters supported the overall proposal to cap regional service area risk score growth for symmetry with the ACO risk score cap. A couple of commenters appreciated CMS' receptiveness to the concerns of interested parties while another thanked CMS for ensuring physicians in certain geographies are not disincentivized from participating in the Shared Savings Program.

Commenters cited a variety of reasons for their support of the proposal. Several commenters discussed the effect that the policy would have on ACOs that care for underserved beneficiaries or medically complex, high-risk beneficiaries, with many saying that it would strengthen incentives to continue providing care to such beneficiaries and another saying that it would bolster the financial stability of ACOs caring for that population. Multiple commenters stated the proposal supports CMS' strategic objective to increase the number of beneficiaries in care relationships with more accountability for quality care.

Several commenters discussed the effect that the policy would have on health care providers or ACOs that operate in regions with high risk score growth. Several commenters stated that the proposal would strengthen incentives for new ACOs to form or for current ACOs to continue participating in the Shared Savings Program, and one commenter stated that the proposal would be equitable for such ACOs. Another commenter stated that the policy would create a more equitable marketplace for all and incentivize ACO growth in rural and underserved markets. One commenter stated the policy would prevent ACOs with higher risk score growth from “getting hit twice” with regional risk score growth. One commenter noted they believed the policy would guard against a small number of health systems dramatically altering the financial landscape of a region. One commenter tentatively supported the proposal but requested that CMS monitor closely to ensure the policy does not unduly penalize certain ACOs in regions with changing demographics beyond the ACOs' control, such as an elderly population approaching the peak years for Medicare spending.

Several commenters described the policy as addressing what they considered flaws with existing policy for updating the benchmark. A couple of commenters suggested that the policy would address unfairness or inequity that exists under current policy. Another commenter stated that the policy would improve accuracy in accounting for regional service area risk score growth. Another commenter appreciated that CMS intends to make methodology changes that substantively address the commenter's underlying concerns with the balance of national and regional trends in Shared Savings Program ACO benchmarks.

MedPAC supported the proposal to cap regional risk score growth with an adjustment for an ACO's market share, stating that the proposal reasonably protects ACOs from coding that may be out of their control, depending on an ACO's share of the market. MedPAC suggested the proposal was a reasonable approach in the absence of an alternative policy for updating the historical benchmark by using administrative update factors or a policy to address the underlying differences between ACOs' risk scores and the average risk score for the assignable beneficiary population. However, MedPAC stated that the proposed approach should be viewed as an interim step because it does not address the underlying issues with coding incentives and regional benchmarking. We further summarize MedPAC's comments on the proposed modifications to the benchmarking methodology elsewhere in section III.G.4 of this final rule.

Response: We agree with commenters that the proposed policy would encourage participation by ACOs in regions with changing beneficiary demographics and health status beyond the ACOs' control and improve the accuracy of the regional update factors for ACOs operating in regional service areas with high risk score growth. We also agree with commenters that the proposed policy would incentivize ACOs to care for higher risk beneficiaries.

Comment: Some commenters specifically stated support for adjusting the cap based on market share, with one commenter stating that the adjustment would maintain a disincentive against coding intensity for ACOs with high market share and another recognizing the need to limit the impact of coding initiatives, particularly among ACOs with high market share, to avoid potentially adverse incentives.

Response: We agree with commenters that adjusting the regional service area risk score growth cap based on the percentage of assignable beneficiaries the ACO serves in the region would help to mitigate the impact of the ACO's own coding initiatives on risk score growth in the ACO's regional service area, particularly when the ACO has a greater influence on its regional service area risk score growth rate. As an ACO's aggregate market share increases, so does the cap on the ACO's regional risk score growth, ultimately limiting the potential increase to the regional update factor for ACOs with high market share. This adjustment to the cap would have the effect of ACOs with higher aggregate market shares seeing smaller increases in the regional component of the update factor, all else being equal.

Comment: Many commenters supporting the proposal requested that the policy be made effective for all ACOs, not just ACOs in agreement periods starting on or after January 1, 2024, and a few commenters recommended that ACOs in existing agreement periods should be given the option of whether to receive the new policy. Some of these commenters described limiting the policy to ACOs entering new agreement periods as “unfair.” A few commenters noted that because the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule was issued after the application deadline for agreement periods starting on January 1, 2024, ACOs in the middle of a current agreement period missed the opportunity to submit applications for early renewal that would allow them to take advantage of this and other proposed changes to the program's benchmarking policies in PY 2024, if finalized. A few other commenters opined that requiring ACOs to go through the early renewal process to benefit from the policy was burdensome for ACOs. One commenter noted that the early renewal process also created burden for CMS and additionally suggested that it could risk disruption to the program and lead to large swings in cohort sizes.

Response: We decline commenters' suggestions to modify the timing of applicability for this policy and the other changes to the financial benchmarking methodology discussed in sections III.G.4.c-e of this final rule. The revisions we are making in this final rule to the benchmarking methodology, including the cap on regional service area risk score growth, will apply to all ACOs entering a new agreement period beginning on or after January 1, 2024. In section III.G.4.e of this final rule, we explain our concerns with applying benchmarking changes to ACOs within an agreement period in responding to similar suggestions in connection with the proposed revisions to the risk adjustment methodology.

Comment: Multiple supportive commenters urged CMS to adopt a higher cap for an ACO's risk score growth. Several commenters urged CMS to increase the current aggregate demographics plus 3 percent cap on ACO risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year to 5 percent and to apply a symmetrical cap on decreases in risk scores. These commenters stated that “the current methodology of normalizing risk adjustment in a region can penalize ACOs that have been coding accurately and that maintain the same level of risk over their agreement period.” Another commenter requested that CMS increase the “regional cap” to 5 percent and cap negative risk score growth at 5 percent, saying that the “current practice of normalizing regional risk adjustment penalizes ACOs that code accurately and maintain the same level of risk.”

One commenter expressed support for the proposal to cap regional risk score growth but also urged CMS to “remove” the cap on ACO risk score growth, but their comment also included a request that the cap be increased to 5 percent after accounting for demographics.

One commenter requested that CMS review whether the “3 percent cap in risk score growth” is a fair policy throughout a 5-year agreement period. The commenter reasoned that HCC scores are based on a previous year's data and “may not reflect active changes in acuity among the population.” The commenter stated their belief that this disadvantages ACOs that treat the most serious or complex Medicare beneficiaries and recommended that CMS consider additional guardrails for years of high volatility—as seen post COVID-19—to protect ACOs that experience growth in the risk of the population they serve. The commenter also suggested CMS adjust prior year financial settlements, particularly PY 2021 and PY 2022, for ACOs that experienced high risk score growth.

Response: In some cases, it was not clear if the commenters were referring to the cap on an ACO's own risk score growth or the proposed cap on an ACO's regional service area risk score growth. However, because a higher cap on increases in risk scores in an ACO's regional service area would not provide the same level of protection to ACOs against risk score increases in their regional service area, we interpret these comments to be requesting a higher cap on HCC risk score increases and a cap on prospective HCC risk score decreases within an ACO's own assigned beneficiary population. We appreciate these commenters' suggestions but note that their suggestions go beyond the scope of the proposed modifications to the Shared Savings Program's benchmarking methodology. The policy of capping risk score growth for an ACO's assigned beneficiaries during an agreement period using the demographics plus 3 percent cap was finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69932 through 69946). We refer these commenters to the discussion in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69942) for an explanation of why we have concluded that it would be inappropriate to increase the demographics plus 3 percent cap or to limit the impact of prospective HCC risk score decreases.

Comment: One commenter expressed concern over CMS's existing and proposed risk adjustment policies, stating that the policies are founded on a perspective that ACO participants are routinely and consistently over coding. The commenter suggested that there are ACOs that serve populations whose health risks do increase substantially over time or whose historical health risks were not fully documented by reported diagnoses, and that they note no evidence to indicate that most physicians in the Shared Savings Program are deliberately manufacturing codes to improve reimbursement.

Response: As we described in section III.G.4.b.(1) of this final rule, it is important to consider the incentives a risk adjustment methodology may introduce for coding intensity. In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69932 through 69946), we highlighted recent research that provided evidence that a majority of CMS-HCC risk score growth for beneficiaries assigned to ACOs may come from coding initiatives and not from changes in beneficiary demographics or deteriorating health status. As a result, we acknowledge the need to limit the upward growth in prospective HCC risk scores in the ACO's regional service area between the benchmark period and the performance year, given that those risk scores are also susceptible to coding initiatives. The proposed policy for capping risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area would limit potential harm to ACOs in regions with high risk score growth when such growth is not due to the ACO's own coding activities while also protecting the Trust Funds by ensuring that benchmarks do not become overly inflated such that an ACO would have to do very little to continue to earn a shared savings payment.

Comment: One commenter requested that CMS exclude beneficiaries that are aligned to ACO REACH ACOs from the regional risk score calculation. The commenter stated their belief that the ACO REACH model's concurrent risk scoring methodology incentivizes ACOs participating in that model to do more coding, driving up risk scores in the region and thus negatively effecting Shared Savings Program ACOs operating in the same region.

Response: We decline to consider an approach that would exclude certain assignable beneficiaries from the calculation of regional risk score growth. We have concerns that removing certain FFS beneficiaries, such as beneficiaries assigned to Medicare Shared Savings Program ACOs or aligned to ACOs participating in the ACO REACH Model, from the population of assignable beneficiaries included in an ACO's regional service area could lead regional growth rates for areas with high ACO penetration to be based on very small sample sizes such that the resulting regional update factor determined for these ACOs could lack validity. We also have concerns that removing certain FFS beneficiaries from an ACO's regional service area could incentivize ACOs—including Shared Savings Program ACOs and ACOs in the ACO REACH Model—to work in combination to favorably influence their regional spending. We noted similar concerns in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69926 and 69927) when discussing an alternative benchmarking policy that would remove an ACO's own assigned beneficiaries, or all Shared Savings Program assigned beneficiaries, from financial calculations based on the ACO's regional service area. However, in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69899) we finalized a three-way blended update factor that incorporates the Accountable Care Prospective Trend (ACPT). The ACPT is a prospectively projected administrative growth factor that is not influenced by actual performance by a single ACO, multiple ACOs in a region, or all ACOs nationally, and therefore, will help address the wider issue of multiple neighboring ACOs influencing the regional trend.

Comment: One commenter recommended that CMS control for the new prospective HCC risk score model phase-in, if finalized, in determining the regional risk score growth cap.

Response: We believe this comment could be interpreted in multiple ways and would require additional clarity before we could further consider the commenter's suggestion. However, we note that for agreement periods beginning January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, the proposed policy to cap regional risk score growth would provide symmetry with how we will cap ACO risk score growth and is expected to improve the accuracy of the regional update factor for ACOs operating in regional service areas with greater risk score growth. In addition, the use of a consistent risk score model for the performance year and all benchmark years, as described in section III.G.4.e of this final rule, is intended to more accurately assess changes in the level of risk for an ACO's assigned beneficiary population over time.

After consideration of the public comments, we are finalizing our proposal to cap regional service area risk score growth for symmetry with the ACO risk score growth cap and to adjust the cap on regional risk score growth to reflect the ACO's aggregate market share without modification. This change will apply to agreement periods beginning January 1, 2024, and subsequent years. We are revising the Shared Savings Program regulations governing the calculation of the regional growth rate when updating the historical benchmark between BY3 and the performance year at § 425.652(b)(2)(ii)(C) to incorporate a regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor. We are also finalizing our proposal to add a new section to the regulations at § 425.655 to describe the calculation of this adjustment factor. We have made one minor editorial change to the text of § 425.655(f)(2)(i) as it appeared in the proposed rule to remove a misplaced word.

c. Mitigating the Impact of the Negative Regional Adjustment on the Benchmark To Encourage Participation by ACOs Caring for Medically Complex, High-Cost Beneficiaries

(1) Background

In earlier rulemaking we have discussed our use of the Secretary's discretion under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act to adjust the historical benchmark by “such other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate” in order to adjust ACO historical benchmarks to reflect FFS expenditures in the ACO's regional service area (81 FR 37962). We initially established a regional adjustment in a benchmark rebasing methodology that applied to ACOs entering a second agreement period beginning on January 1, 2017, January 1, 2018, or January 1, 2019 (§ 425.603(c) through (g)), before modifying our policy to apply this adjustment program wide beginning with agreement periods starting on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years (§ 425.601(a)(8)). In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69915 through 69923) we modified the way we would calculate the regional adjustment for ACOs in agreement periods starting on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years (§ 425.656). We also finalized a policy that would modify the way we would apply the regional adjustment to the benchmark that would also take into account a new adjustment for prior savings that would be available to eligible ACOs (§ 425.652(a)(8)).

In accordance with § 425.601(a)(8), for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019 and before January 1, 2024, we adjust historical benchmark expenditures by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries) by a percentage of the difference between the average per capita expenditure amount for the ACO's regional service area and the average per capita amount of the ACO's historical benchmark (referred to herein as the “regional adjustment”). The percentage applied in calculating the regional adjustment depends on whether the ACO has lower or higher spending compared to the ACO's regional service area and the agreement period for which the ACO is subject to the regional adjustment, according to the phase-in schedule of applicable weights. We cap the per capita dollar amount of the regional adjustment for each Medicare enrollment type at a dollar amount equal to positive or negative 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program in benchmark year (BY) 3 for assignable beneficiaries (as defined in § 425.20) in that Medicare enrollment type identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3 (§ 425.601(a)(8)(ii)(C)) (referred to herein as positive or negative 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries, and as the “symmetrical cap,” terms which we consider to be synonymous). We then apply the capped regional adjustment for each Medicare enrollment type by adding it to the historical benchmark expenditure for that enrollment type. A positive regional adjustment for a given Medicare enrollment type increases the benchmark for that enrollment type, whereas a negative regional adjustment decreases the benchmark for that enrollment type.

With the policies finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69915 through 69923), we sought to reduce the impact of negative regional adjustments in several ways for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and subsequent years. First, we finalized a policy that replaced the negative 5 percent cap on the negative regional adjustment with a negative 1.5 percent cap. Under this policy, we would continue to cap positive adjustments for each Medicare enrollment type at a dollar amount equal to 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for that enrollment type but would cap negative adjustments for each enrollment type at a dollar amount equal to negative 1.5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for that enrollment type. Additionally, after applying the negative 1.5 percent cap, we would apply an offset factor that would gradually decrease the negative regional adjustment amount for a given Medicare enrollment type as an ACO's proportion of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries increases or its weighted average prospective HCC risk score increases. Finally, for an ACO eligible for the prior savings adjustment for which the regional adjustment expressed as a single value (based on taking a person year weighted average across the four Medicare enrollment types) is negative, we would further offset the regional adjustment by the prior savings adjustment. In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69919) we expressed our belief that by reducing the impact of negative regional adjustments, these policies would incentivize ACOs that serve high-cost beneficiaries to join or continue to participate in the Shared Savings Program.

These policies to reduce the impact of negative regional adjustments are reflected in several new sections of the regulations. Section 425.652 is the main provision that describes the methodology for establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, including the interaction of the regional adjustment and the prior savings adjustment. Sections 425.656 and 425.658 provide additional detail on the calculations of the regional adjustment and the prior savings adjustment, respectively.

Table 40 illustrates how the caps on the regional adjustment would be calculated and applied to positive and negative regional adjustments at the Medicare enrollment type level under the policy finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule. Note that the uncapped regional adjustment values would be calculated using the applicable percentage phase-in weight based on whether the ACO has lower or higher spending as compared to its regional service area and the ACO's agreement period subject to a regional adjustment as described in § 425.656(d). For example, if an ACO is considered to have lower spending compared to the ACO's regional service area, and it is the ACO's first agreement period subject to the regional adjustment, we would use a weight of 35 percent when applying the regional adjustment. If an ACO is considered to have higher spending compared to the ACO's regional service area, and it is the ACO's first agreement period subject to the regional adjustment, we would use a weight of 15 percent when applying the regional adjustment.

The hypothetical ACO in this example has a mix of positive and negative regional adjustments across the four enrollment types. The ACO's uncapped aged/non-dual eligible adjustment is outside the negative 1.5 percent cap and thus changes from −$307 to −$166 when the cap is applied. The ACO's adjustments for the other three enrollment types are all within the applicable positive or negative caps, and thus, are unaffected. The ACO's overall weighted average regional adjustment (calculated by multiplying the adjustment for each enrollment type by the corresponding enrollment type proportion and then summing across the four enrollment types) changes from −$209 to −$111 when the negative regional adjustment cap is applied, reducing the per capita impact of the negative regional adjustment by $98.

Under the methodology adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69917 and 69920), after we apply the caps, we next apply an offset factor to any negative regional adjustments at the enrollment type level. The offset factor is based on the following: [A] the ACO's overall proportion of BY3 assigned beneficiaries that are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid (including dually eligible ESRD, disabled, and aged beneficiaries) 268 and [B] the ACO's weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 taken across the four Medicare enrollment types. 269 Before taking this weighted average, the risk score for each enrollment type is first renormalized by dividing by the national mean risk score for the assignable FFS population for that enrollment type identified for the calendar year corresponding to BY3. Specifically, the offset factor is calculated as:

268 In computing this proportion, we use for each beneficiary the fraction of the year (referred to as person years) in which they were eligible for the aged/dual eligible enrollment type or for which they were eligible for the ESRD or disabled enrollment type and dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

269 In computing this weighted average, we apply a weight to the risk score for BY3 for an enrollment type that is equal to the product of the ACO's BY3 per capita expenditures for that enrollment type and the ACO's BY3 person years for that enrollment type.

Offset factor = [A] + ([B] − 1)

We apply the offset factor, which is subject to a minimum of zero and a maximum of one, by subtracting its value from 1 and multiplying this difference by the negative regional adjustment for each Medicare enrollment type, calculated as:

Final regional adjustment = Negative regional adjustment × (1 − Offset factor)

The higher an ACO's proportion of dually eligible beneficiaries or the higher its risk score, the larger the offset factor would be and the larger the reduction to the overall negative regional adjustment. If the offset factor is equal to the maximum value of one, the ACO would not receive a negative regional adjustment for any enrollment type, because each negative adjustment would be multiplied by a value of 1 minus the offset factor, or 0. For these ACOs, the overall weighted average regional adjustment would either be 0 (if the ACO had negative adjustments for all four enrollment types prior to the application of the offset factor) or positive (if the ACO had a mix of positive and negative adjustments at the enrollment type level prior to the application of the offset factor). If the offset factor is equal to the minimum value of zero, the ACO would receive no benefit from the offset factor.

To illustrate how the offset factor would be calculated and applied, assume that the hypothetical ACO from Table 40 had a proportion of dually eligible beneficiaries of 0.130 and a weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 of 1.240. The offset factor for this ACO would be calculated as:

Offset factor = 0.130 + (1.240 − 1) = 0.370

This factor would be applied as illustrated in Table 41 by multiplying the negative regional adjustment for each applicable Medicare enrollment type by 1 minus the offset factor or 0.630.

Here, the offset factor is applied to the regional adjustments for the disabled and aged/non-dual eligible populations, as both are negative, but not to the regional adjustments for the ESRD and aged/dual eligible populations, which are both positive. Taking the weighted average across the enrollment types following application of the offset factor shows that the ACO's overall weighted regional adjustment changes from −$111 before the offset to −$55 after the offset, further reducing the per capita impact of the negative regional adjustment by $56. The overall per capita impact of both the cap and offset factor for this ACO would be $154.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69918 and 69921), we presented simulations of the combined impact of the cap and offset factor relative to the symmetrical positive and negative 5 percent cap then in place for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years. The results of these simulations, which used data from PY 2020 historical benchmarks for ACOs in agreement periods starting on or after July 1, 2019, and from PY 2022 historical benchmarks for ACOs starting an agreement period on January 1, 2022, found the negative regional adjustment for almost every ACO that had an overall negative regional adjustment in the PY 2020 and PY 2022 data under the symmetrical cap would have been reduced (or eliminated), with an average per capita impact of approximately $114 for PY 2020 and $48 for PY 2022. ACOs with higher weighted average BY3 prospective HCC risk scores and higher proportions of dually eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries had overall greater reductions in their negative regional adjustments. Four ACOs in the PY 2020 simulation and one in the PY 2022 simulation had an offset factor of 1, meaning they would have received a full offset to their negative regional adjustments.

Under a separate policy also finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, an ACO beginning an agreement period on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years that is a renewing or re-entering ACO may be eligible to receive an adjustment to its benchmark to account for savings generated in performance years that correspond to the benchmark years of its new agreement period. A full discussion of this policy can be found in that earlier rulemaking (87 FR 69899 through 69915). The policy was designed such that an eligible ACO would receive the higher of its overall positive regional adjustment or its prior savings adjustment, or a combination of the two if its overall regional adjustment is negative and it had prior savings. ACOs ineligible for the prior savings adjustment would receive the regional adjustment (computed as described earlier in this section applying a 5 percent cap on positive regional adjustments and a −1.5 percent cap and offset factor on negative regional adjustments). Specifically, if the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is positive, the ACO would receive a final adjustment equal to the higher of the regional adjustment or an adjustment based on the ACO's prior savings (see § 425.652(a)(8)(iii)(B)). If the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is negative, we would calculate the final adjustment as described in § 425.652(a)(8)(iii)(A), with the ACO receiving either a smaller negative regional adjustment or a positive adjustment for prior savings depending on the relative size of the negative regional adjustment and the ACO's pro-rated prior savings.

Based on further consideration, in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52467) we expressed our belief that it was important and timely to revisit the policy that allows for negative adjustments to be applied in establishing the benchmark for ACOs. While we did not consider eliminating negative regional adjustments program-wide in CY 2023 PFS rulemaking, one commenter noted that there is an argument for doing so. We explained our belief that further mitigating the impact of the negative regional adjustment for ACOs with high-cost populations, thereby resulting in higher benchmarks for ACOs compared to the recently finalized methodology, could further bolster the business case for Shared Savings Program participation by such ACOs.

As we discussed in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 46161), there is evidence that certain aspects of the program's benchmarking methodology, notably the regional adjustment to the benchmark, may deter participation among ACOs with spending above their regional service area including those serving medically complex, high-cost populations. High-cost ACOs are underrepresented in the Shared Savings Program, with around 86 percent of all participating ACOs receiving an overall positive regional adjustment in PY 2022 indicating that a majority of ACOs are lower spending than their regional service area. We also observed that ACOs that received an overall negative regional adjustment for PY 2022 were less likely to continue participation in the program in PY 2023 than were ACOs that received an overall positive regional adjustment, with 22 percent of ACOs with a negative overall adjustment leaving the program compared to 12 percent of ACOs with a positive overall adjustment. Since PY 2017 the overall annual average share of ACOs that leave the program has been 12 percent. A recent academic study also found evidence suggesting selective participation among ACOs in response to the original adoption of a regional adjustment in 2017, with the composition of ACOs between 2017 to 2019 increasingly shifting to providers with lower preexisting levels of spending. 270 The authors attributed these changes to a combination of the entry of new ACOs with lower baseline spending, the exit of higher-spending ACOs, and the reconfiguration of ACO participant lists to favor lower-spending practices among ACOs continuing participation in the program.

270 Lyu P, Chernew M, McWilliams J. Benchmarking Changes And Selective Participation In The Medicare Shared Savings Program. Health Affairs. May 1, 2023. Available at https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.2022.01061 .

Relatedly, we have observed that negative regional adjustments may make it more difficult for ACOs to succeed in the program financially. Between PY 2017, when regional adjustments were first introduced in the Shared Savings Program, and PY 2021, ACOs that received negative regional adjustments have been consistently less likely to share in savings than ACOs that received positive regional adjustments. For example, in PY 2021 we observed that 37 percent of ACOs that received a negative regional adjustment shared in savings compared to 63 percent among those with a positive adjustment.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52468), we stated that eliminating the possibility that an ACO will receive an overall negative regional adjustment to its benchmark in combination with the other elements of the benchmarking methodology finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, would work together to further our efforts to ensure sustainability of the benchmarking methodology. More specifically, we believed this policy change would further encourage continued participation among high-cost ACOs that serve medically complex beneficiaries by eliminating the potential of a lower benchmark due to an overall negative regional adjustment. It may also encourage ACOs serving such populations that may have otherwise been discouraged from participating in the Shared Savings Program by the idea of a lower benchmark to join. We noted that the implementation of this policy would allow ACOs to serve the most vulnerable populations while lessening the concern of how their patient population may affect their performance in the program. We also stated our belief that program participation by ACOs serving these populations has the potential, over time, to produce cost savings for the Medicare Trust Funds by improving care coordination and quality of care for such beneficiaries.

Additionally, we stated that eliminating overall negative regional adjustments could further incentivize greater participation among ACOs whose ACO participants have historically been less efficient than other providers and suppliers in their regions. Such ACOs may have the greatest potential to generate cost savings for the Medicare Trust Funds by adopting more efficient practices, and therefore, their participation in the program should not be discouraged.

(2) Revisions

In light of these considerations, in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52468 through 52472) we proposed to modify the policies we adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule so as to prevent any ACO from receiving an adjustment that would cause its benchmark to be lower than it would have been in the absence of a regional adjustment. Specifically, we proposed the following approach to calculate and apply the regional adjustment, or the regional adjustment in combination with the prior savings adjustment, if applicable, for ACOs in agreement periods starting on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years:

• We would continue to calculate the original uncapped regional adjustment by Medicare enrollment type using the applicable percentage phase-in weight based on whether the ACO has lower or higher spending compared to its regional service area and the ACO's agreement period subject to a regional adjustment as described in § 425.656(d).

• We would continue to apply the 5 percent cap on positive regional adjustments and the −1.5 percent cap and offset factor on negative regional adjustments at the enrollment type level, as finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule and described in § 425.656(c). For the performance year beginning on January 1, 2025, and subsequent performance years, the national assignable FFS population used to calculate the caps would reflect the revised definition of assignable beneficiary that incorporates the expanded window for assignment. (See section III.G.3.a of this final rule for a description of the proposed revisions to the definition of assignable beneficiary.)

• After applying the cap and offset factor (if applicable), we would express the regional adjustment as a single per capita value by calculating a person year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment type-specific regional adjustment values.

• If the ACO's regional adjustment amount (expressed as a single per capita value) is positive, the ACO would receive a regional adjustment, according to the approach we finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule. That is, we would apply the enrollment type-specific regional adjustment amounts separately to the historical benchmark expenditures for each Medicare enrollment type. If the ACO is also eligible for a prior savings adjustment, the ACO would receive the higher of the two adjustments. If the regional adjustment amount (expressed as a single per capita value) is higher, we would apply the enrollment type-specific regional adjustment amounts separately to the historical benchmark expenditures for each Medicare enrollment type. If the prior savings adjustment is higher, we would apply the adjustment in the manner finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule as a flat dollar amount applied separately to the historical benchmark expenditures for each Medicare enrollment type.

• If the ACO's regional adjustment amount (expressed as a single per capita value) is negative, the ACO would receive no regional adjustment to its benchmark for any enrollment type. If the ACO is eligible for a prior savings adjustment, it would receive the prior savings adjustment as its final adjustment, without any offsetting reduction for the negative regional adjustment.

Under the proposed approach, ACOs that would face a negative overall adjustment to their benchmark based on the methodology adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule would benefit, as they would now receive no downward adjustment. Additionally, ACOs that have a negative regional adjustment amount (expressed as a single value) and are eligible for a prior savings adjustment under the policy adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (§ 425.658) would also be expected to benefit from the proposed policy. Specifically, these ACOs could receive a larger positive adjustment to their benchmark or a positive adjustment instead of a negative adjustment, as we would no longer offset the prior savings amount by the negative regional adjustment amount when determining the final adjustment that would apply to the ACO's benchmark as described in the current regulations in § 425.652(a)(8)(iii)(A). 271 In the proposed rule, we stated our belief that by increasing the potential benefit of the prior savings adjustment in this manner, our proposed policy would be responsive to the comments discussed in the CY 2023 PFS final rule recommending that CMS make the prior savings adjustment more favorable, particularly for ACOs serving high-risk populations (see 87 FR 69910 through 69914).

271 For examples of the calculation of the final adjustment when an ACO is eligible for a prior savings adjustment and the overall regional adjustment is negative under the policy adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, please refer to Tables 65 and 66 of the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69904 and 69905). In Table 65 the hypothetical ACO receives a positive final adjustment and in Table 66 a negative final adjustment.

Importantly, no ACO would be made worse off under the proposed policy. ACOs that have an overall positive regional adjustment amount would continue to receive the same adjustment to their benchmark as they would under the methodology finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule calculated and applied as described in the current regulations at §§ 425.656 and 425.652(a)(8), respectively. For these ACOs, the regional adjustment would continue to reflect the percentage phase-in weight based on whether the ACO has lower or higher spending compared to its regional service area and the ACO's agreement period subject to a regional adjustment as described in § 425.656(d) and we would continue to allow negative adjustments to be applied at the enrollment type level for those ACOs that receive a positive overall regional adjustment. We explained our belief that this would be appropriate because these ACOs would continue to receive a positive overall adjustment to their benchmark and thus should already have greater incentive to join or continue participation in the program than ACOs that might otherwise face an adjustment that reduces their benchmark.

Tables 41 and 42 present hypothetical examples to demonstrate how we would determine the final adjustment to an ACO's benchmark under the proposed policy. Both tables include two hypothetical ACOs. The first ACO, ACO A, is the same hypothetical ACO as illustrated in Tables 39 and 40 within this section and has an overall negative regional adjustment. The second ACO, ACO B, has an overall positive regional adjustment. Table 42 assumes that both ACOs are ineligible for a prior savings adjustment, whereas Table 43 shows how the calculation would change if both ACOs were eligible for such an adjustment.

In Table 42, because ACO A had an overall negative regional adjustment and was not eligible for a prior savings adjustment, the ACO ultimately receives no adjustment, upward or downward, to its benchmark. For ACO B, whose overall regional adjustment is positive, the final adjustment is the regional adjustment, which is applied by adding the regional adjustment specific to each enrollment type (reflecting the percentage weight determined for the ACO and after the application of the cap and offset factor, if applicable) to the ACO's pre-adjustment historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type.

In Table 43, both ACO A and ACO B are eligible for a prior savings adjustment. Because ACO A has a negative overall regional adjustment, its final adjustment is automatically set equal to the prior savings adjustment of $58. The adjustment is applied as a flat dollar amount by adding the $58 to the ACO's historical benchmark expenditures (row [A]) for each enrollment type. For ACO B, by contrast, the final adjustment is determined by comparing the regional adjustment amount (expressed as a single value) to the prior savings adjustment amount and using the higher of the two. In this case the ACO would receive a final adjustment equal to the prior savings adjustment of $239. Like with ACO A, this would be applied to the ACO's historical benchmark expenditures for each enrollment type as a flat dollar amount.

In revisiting simulations done with the PY 2020 data described earlier in this section, there were 36 ACOs (of the 43 ACOs with a negative regional adjustment under the policy with the symmetrical cap) simulated to have a negative overall regional adjustment after the application of the cap and offset factor. Among these, 31 would not have been eligible for a prior savings adjustment and would have had this negative regional adjustment applied to their benchmark under the policy adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule. Under the new proposed policy, these ACOs would receive no adjustment to their benchmark. The average per capita benefit of eliminating the downward adjustment would be $30.

The remaining five ACOs would have been eligible for the prior savings adjustment. These ACOs would have received a positive final adjustment to their benchmark under the methodology adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule but would receive a larger positive adjustment under the new proposed policy, with an average per capita increase of $26. This is because we would no longer be offsetting the prior savings amount by the negative regional adjustment as part of determining the final adjustment to the ACO's benchmark as would happen under the methodology finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule and codified at § 425.652(a)(8)(iii)(A).

In the PY 2022 simulation described earlier in this section, there were 26 ACOs (of the 27 ACOs with a negative regional adjustment under the policy with the symmetrical cap) that would have had a negative regional adjustment, expressed as a single per capita value, after the application of the policy adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule. Among these, 14 ACOs would not have been eligible for a prior savings adjustment and would have their full negative regional adjustment eliminated under the new proposed policy, with an average impact of $66. The remaining 12 ACOs that would have been eligible for a prior savings adjustment would see a larger positive adjustment under the proposed policy, with an average increase of $14.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52472), we explained our belief that the proposed changes to the calculation and application of the regional adjustment, including its interaction with the prior savings adjustment, would strengthen incentives for participation among ACOs that may otherwise be subject to a downward adjustment to their benchmark due to the negative regional adjustment. We noted that the proposed policy, if finalized, would not adversely impact any ACO's benchmark relative to the policy that was finalized in CY 2023 PFS final rule, all else being equal, but would tend to increase benchmarks for ACOs that have historically had higher spending than their regional service area. Based on our simulations using data from PY 2020 and PY 2022, the estimated average increase to the overall benchmark would be between 0.2 and 0.4 percent but could be larger in future years when more ACOs would be subject to higher phase-in weights for calculating the negative regional adjustment that would apply (alone or in combination with the prior savings adjustment) under the policy adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule. We also noted that ACOs that would benefit from the proposed policy are likely to include those that serve high-cost, medically complex patients or those whose ACO participants have historically been less efficient than their regional counterparts but may have the potential to generate the greatest savings to Medicare through their participation in the Shared Savings Program.

We proposed to implement the changes described in this section through revisions to §§ 425.652, 425.656, and 425.658. Specifically, within § 425.652, which is the section that sets forth the methodology for establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, we proposed revisions to § 425.652(a)(8). As revised, this provision would describe how we would determine and apply the adjustment to an ACO's benchmark depending on whether the ACO is eligible for a prior savings adjustment and whether the ACO's regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is positive or negative. This provision would also establish that if an ACO is not eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment and has a regional adjustment, expressed as a single value that is negative or zero, the ACO will not receive an adjustment to its benchmark.

We proposed to revise § 425.656 (which describes the calculation of the regional adjustment) and § 425.658 (which describes the calculation of the prior savings adjustment) to include certain elements of each calculation that were previously described in § 425.652(a)(8). Specifically, we proposed to revise § 425.656 to redesignate paragraphs (d) and (e) as paragraphs (e) and (f) (respectively) and to specify in a new paragraph (d) that we would express the regional adjustment as a single value, and use this value in determining whether a regional adjustment or a prior savings adjustment would be applied to the ACO's benchmark in accordance with § 425.652(a)(8) (as revised under the proposed rule). We also proposed modifications to update certain cross-references within § 425.656 for accuracy and consistency with the proposed revisions to the section.

We proposed to revise § 425.658 to redesignate paragraph (c) as paragraph (d). We proposed to add a new paragraph (c) under § 425.658 specifying that we would calculate the per capita savings adjustment as the lesser of 50 percent of the pro-rated average per capita savings amount (computed as described in § 425.658(b)(3)(ii)) and the cap equal to 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for BY3 expressed as a single value by taking a person-year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment-type specific values. We proposed to revise newly redesignated paragraph (d) of § 425.658 to specify CMS would compare the per capita prior savings adjustment with the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value as described in § 425.656(d), to determine the adjustment, if any, that would be applied to the ACO's benchmark in accordance with § 425.652(a)(8).

Additionally, we proposed to make the following conforming changes:

• In § 425.600(f)(4)(ii), we proposed to remove the reference “425.656(d)” and add in its place the reference “425.656(e)”.

• In § 425.611(c)(2)(iii), we proposed to remove the reference “§ 425.652(a)(8)(iv)” and add in its place the reference “§ 425.658(c)(1)(ii)”.

• In § 425.652(a)(9)(v), we proposed to remove the wording that references CMS redetermining the adjustment to the benchmark based on “a combination of” the redetermined regional adjustment and the prior savings adjustment.

• In § 425.658(b)(3)(i), which specifies that the ACO is not eligible to receive an adjustment for prior savings if the average per capita amount computed in § 425.658(b)(2) is less than or equal to zero, we proposed to remove the sentence: “The ACO will receive the regional adjustment to its benchmark as described in § 425.656.”

We solicited comments on these proposed changes.

We received public comments on these proposals. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: Many commenters supported the proposal to further mitigate the impact of negative regional adjustment to the benchmark. A number of these commenters suggested that the policy would increase program participation among ACOs with higher costs than their region by removing disincentives or barriers to entry, and would encourage more ACOs to care for underserved, medically complex and high-cost patients. Another commenter suggested that eliminating the regional adjustment, along with the proposed cap on HCC risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area, would ensure that physicians in certain geographies are not disincentivized from participating.

MedPAC indicated that they concurred with the proposal to remove negative regional adjustments, though they expressed more general concerns about the regional adjustment overall, as discussed later in this section. In explaining their support for the policy, they noted their agreement with CMS that better incentives are needed to induce participation among health care providers serving beneficiaries with relatively higher spending. Another commenter stated their belief that the policy presented a near term solution for addressing selective participation by encouraging high cost ACOs to participate and, by doing so, would enable larger aggregate savings for Medicare.

Several commenters opined on the types of ACOs that would likely benefit from the proposed policy, if finalized. Among those mentioned were ACOs caring for medically complex, high cost, or high-risk patients, ACOs serving high proportions of dually eligible patients, and ACOs with rural ACO participants. Some of these commenters indicated the policy, together with the other benchmarking proposals, would “level the playing field” for health care providers serving at-risk populations.

Other commenters noted that under the proposal, ACOs eligible for a prior savings adjustment would not have those savings offset by a negative regional adjustment, with one commenter explaining that this would make the prior savings adjustment more favorable, particularly for ACOs serving high-risk populations and a few commenters citing the favorable impact on the prior savings adjustment as the reason for their support of the proposal.

Expressing tentative support for this and the other proposed benchmarking policies, one commenter recommended that CMS move to finalize these proposals but warned that none had yet been tested via real world application. Another commenter suggested that the proposed modifications to the negative regional adjustment, similar to the proposal to cap regional risk score growth, would improve coding accuracy, although they did not explain why they held this belief.

Response: We agree with commenters that the proposed approach to further reducing the impact of the negative regional adjustment will facilitate participation of ACOs in the Shared Savings Program, particularly ACOs with spending above spending in their regional service area and those serving medically complex, high-cost populations, which are the beneficiaries that can benefit the greatest from better care coordination offered by ACOs. We expect this policy will help to promote agency goals of promoting health equity and having 100 percent of people with Original Medicare in an accountable care relationship by 2030, while also benefitting the Trust Funds by encouraging participation from ACOs serving populations and beneficiaries with highest potential for reducing spending and improving quality and patient experience through better care coordination.

Comment: Many commenters supported the proposal and requested that the policy be made effective for all ACOs, not just ACOs in agreement periods starting on or after January 1, 2024. A few commenters recommended that ACOs in existing agreement periods should be given the option of whether to receive the new policy. Some commenters described limiting the policy to ACOs entering new agreement periods as “unfair.” One commenter argued that the proposed methodology to further mitigate the impact of negative regional adjustments would be beneficial for new ACOs serving high cost, high-risk populations, but would not provide any new protection for existing ACOs in the midst of current agreement periods or for renewing ACOs that already expected a full offset of the negative regional adjustment per the policy finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule. A few commenters noted that because the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule was issued after the application deadline for agreement periods starting on January 1, 2024, ACOs in the middle of a current agreement period missed the opportunity to submit applications for early renewal that would allow them to take advantage of this and other proposed changes to the program's benchmarking policies in PY 2024, if finalized.

A few other commenters opined that requiring ACOs to go through the early renewal process to benefit from the policy was burdensome for ACOs. One commenter noted that the early renewal process also created burden for CMS and additionally suggested that it could risk disruption to the program and lead to large swings in cohort sizes. Several commenters indicated that failure to apply the policy to all ACOs in the program would penalize current ACOs serving costlier patients, work against the program's health equity goals, or add unnecessary confusion and complexity. A few commenters cited the benefits of applying the policy to all ACOs, with one commenter noting that this would promote consistency across the program and avoid disparate impacts across ACOs and another suggesting this would encourage ACO growth and recognize challenges current ACOs are facing.

Response: We decline commenters' suggestions to modify the timing of applicability for this policy and the other changes to the financial benchmarking methodology policies discussed in sections III.G.4.b-e of this final rule. The revisions we are making in this final rule to the benchmarking methodology, including the changes to mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustment, will apply to ACOs entering a new agreement period beginning on or after January 1, 2024. In section III.G.4.e of this final rule, we explain our concerns with applying benchmarking changes to ACOs within an agreement period in responding to similar suggestions in connection with the proposed revisions to the risk adjustment methodology.

Comment: Several commenters expressed concern that none of the benchmark proposals in the proposed rule, including the proposal to further mitigate the impact of negative regional adjustments, would solve the ratchet effect where ACOs' benchmarks will continue to be lower over time as they reduce spending in their populations and future benchmarks are rebased using lower historic spending. A few commenters cautioned that if the policy to further mitigate negative regional adjustments is successful in bringing more inefficient ACOs into the program, this could increase the rate at which a given region becomes more efficient. They claimed that this, in turn, could exacerbate the ratchet effect for ACOs that are already efficient and now would be competing against a region getting more efficient at a faster pace. One such commenter strongly recommended that the policy to eliminate the negative regional adjustments be coupled with changes to address benchmark ratcheting that they claim occurs for regionally efficient ACOs at rebasing, particularly as ACOs enter later agreement periods. Another commenter encouraged CMS to monitor for possible unintended consequences of any of the proposed benchmarking policies if finalized in this final rule, including any disproportionate impacts on certain types of ACOs or patient populations, and to be receptive to feedback from industry partners and to look for additional ways to continuously improve benchmarking and risk adjustment methodologies. In particular, these commenters urged CMS to look for ways to address the ratcheting effect and to retain high performing ACOs in the program.

One commenter stated that they do not believe that the additional modifications to the benchmarking methodology proposed in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule go far enough to protect existing ACOs serving high cost, underserved populations, like themselves, from experiencing dramatic ratchets to their benchmarks upon their next agreement renewal. In light of this belief, the commenter offered multiple recommendations related to the prior savings adjustment and administratively set benchmarks, determinations of Qualifying Alternative Payment Model Participants (QPs), quality reporting and measures, risk adjustment, and beneficiary assignment (all summarized elsewhere in this final rule) that would allow their ACO to sustainably continue its participation in the program. Another commenter also urged CMS to develop a long-term vision for benchmarks that relies on an administrative benchmarking approach.

Response: Among the benchmarking policies finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule were two policies that were aimed at limiting the extent to which an ACO's own past success or the past success of other ACOs, at reducing expenditures would affect the ACO's benchmark in future agreement periods. First, the prior savings adjustment (see 87 FR 69898 through 69915) provides for a positive adjustment to be applied to the historical benchmark for ACOs that generated savings in the 3 years immediately preceding their current agreement period. This adjustment is directly connected to an ACO's own success at reducing expenditures, as ACOs achieving greater savings can potentially receive larger positive adjustments. We expect that eliminating the impact of negative regional adjustments on the prior savings adjustment, as proposed, will increase the effectiveness of the prior savings adjustment in addressing concerns about ratcheting. Second, the inclusion of a prospectively-determined component, the Accountable Care Prospective Trend (ACPT), in the factor used to update the benchmark to the performance year for agreement periods starting on or after January 1, 2024 (see 87 FR 69881 to 69898) will help to address the ratchet effect by insulating a portion of the update factor from the impact that ACO savings can have on retrospective national and regional spending trends. In May 2023, we published specifications detailing the methodology for computing the ACPT and explaining how it will be incorporated into the update factor. 272 We expect that the ACPT will help to address ratcheting concerns raised regarding the negative regional adjustment policy, that were interpreted to suggest if less efficient ACOs join the program and are successful in reducing expenditures for their assigned beneficiaries, regional trends facing already-efficient ACOs will be lower than they otherwise would.

272 See Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications of the Accountable Care Prospective Trend (ACPT) and Three-Way Blended Benchmark Update Factor (version #1, May 2023), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-ssp-acpt-specifications.pdf .

As the prior savings adjustment and the three-way blended update factor that includes the ACPT apply only for agreement periods starting on or after January 1, 2024, we have not yet had a chance to gauge their success in meeting their intended aims in practice or to assess whether they have unintended consequences. We have continued to actively solicit feedback on what additional measures should be taken in the Shared Savings Program to further assuage concerns held by ACOs and other interested parties regarding the ratchet effect and the need for appropriate incentives to encourage ACOs to join the program and remain in the program over multiple agreement periods. For example, in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (see 88 FR 52494 through 52496), we sought comment on potential future modifications to both the prior savings adjustment and the benchmark update factor. As discussed in section III.G.8 of this final rule, we will take these suggestions and recommendations into consideration as we assess changes to propose in future notice and comment rulemaking.

Comment: One commenter requested that CMS make the data used to make the calculations of adjustments transparent to ACOs, which they believed would aid ACOs and their ACO participants in planning how to care for these patients. The same commenter also opined that ACOs should have a reliable way to appeal CMS's determination with enough time to have any appeals resolved prior to payment and participation in subsequent performance years but did not specify whether they were referring to determinations of shared savings payments or some other aspect of the payment methodology.

Response: ACOs receive historical benchmark reports which transparently detail the historical benchmark calculation, including the computation of positive and negative regional adjustments and, when it was applicable in the past, the prior savings adjustment. Modifications to the methodology for calculating the historical benchmark finalized in this rule will be reflected in such reports to provide additional transparency of benchmark calculations for ACOs beginning agreement periods on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years. Additionally, we make various data available to ACOs to further promote transparency of our benchmarking calculations. For example, ACOs receive information on county of residence for all assigned beneficiaries in the Assignment List Report that is provided for each benchmark and performance year. ACOs can use this information in conjunction with public use files containing per capita expenditures and average risk scores for assignable beneficiaries (available on data.cms.gov ) to estimate regional expenditures used in benchmark calculations.

The reconsideration review process for the Shared Savings Program is codified in 42 CFR part 425, subpart I of the program regulations. Consistent with section 1899(g) of the Act, § 425.802(a) states that an ACO may appeal an initial determination that is not prohibited from administrative or judicial review under § 425.800 by requesting a reconsideration review by a CMS reconsideration official. The initial determination or revised initial determination of the benchmark for an ACO in accordance with section 1899(d) of the Act is listed among the Shared Savings Program determinations that are prohibited from reconsideration, appeal, or other administrative or judicial review as specified in § 425.800. Additional information regarding the reconsideration review process is provided in the Medicare Shared Savings Program, Requesting Technical Assistance And Reconsideration Review Guidance (version #9, August 2022), available at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/sharedsavingsprogram/Downloads/Reconsideration-Review-Process-Guidance.pdf .

Comment: Several commenters, as part of their comments on our proposal to mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustment, also recommended that CMS take additional action to support ACOs serving medically complex beneficiaries, including dual eligible beneficiaries or those in underserved areas, and to further strengthen incentives for high-cost providers and suppliers to participate in the Shared Savings Program. One commenter encouraged CMS to continue to update its benchmarking methodologies to account for unfair financial outcomes realized by ACOs treating medically complex patients, many of whom they noted, are dual-eligible, but did not offer specific suggestions for achieving this goal. Several other commenters offered suggestions that went beyond the scope of the proposed modifications, or beyond the scope of the program's benchmarking methodology, including the following:

• “Lowering the cap” based on the share of the ACO's population that is attributed through Step 2 assignment to support ACOs that include a significant portion of high needs beneficiaries or beneficiaries aligned through specialists, although it was unclear which cap the commenter was referencing in this suggestion.

• Supporting facilities serving medically complex beneficiaries such as by facilitating partnerships with community organizations.

• Providing positive incentives to ACOs serving dually eligible and other medically complex beneficiaries.

• Incorporating a positive adjustment to the benchmark to accommodate increased spending that will occur when an ACO increases access to care for underserved areas.

Response: The commenters' suggestions go beyond the scope of the modifications proposed to mitigate impacts of the negative regional adjustment, including the proposed modifications of the interaction between the regional adjustment and the prior savings adjustment. However, we note that in the CY 2023 PFS final rule we finalized other changes to the program's financial methodologies (in addition to the modifications to the negative regional adjustment) that we expect will benefit ACOs serving complex or underserved beneficiaries. For example, we finalized changes to the risk adjustment methodology to better account for medically complex, high-cost beneficiaries (see 87 FR 69932 through 69946) and a new policy to provide increased opportunities for low revenue ACOs, which may include smaller rural ACOs, to share in savings (see 87 FR 69946 through 69952). We also note that in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule we sought comment on how to promote collaboration between ACOs and community-based organizations and refer readers to section III.G.8. of this final rule where we summarize the feedback we received.

Comment: Several commenters called on CMS to consider providing support for ACOs receiving a positive regional adjustment that have already lowered costs in the communities they serve. Some suggested that the caps on the positive regional adjustment and the new prior savings adjustment effectively serve as a further cap on savings, which they believe should be addressed to ensure that successful ACOs remain in the Shared Savings Program. Another commenter recommended several modifications to positive regional adjustments, including applying a factor that would take into account the proportion of an ACO's assigned beneficiary population that is underserved, setting the cap on positive regional adjustments equal to 5 percent of BY3 risk-adjusted regional expenditures by Medicare enrollment type, and using a 50 percent weight to calculate positive regional adjustments starting with the first agreement period.

Response: We decline to make any modifications to the methodology for calculating positive regional adjustments, including the calculation of the cap on positive regional adjustments or the phase-in of weights used to calculate the adjustment, or to the calculation of the cap on the prior savings adjustment at this time. Such suggestions go beyond the scope of the proposed policy which was focused on encouraging participation by ACOs caring for medically complex, high-cost beneficiaries. Furthermore, the caps on positive regional adjustments and prior savings adjustments are an important mechanism to protect the Trust Funds by ensuring that benchmarks are not overly inflated such that an ACO would have to do very little to continue to earn a shared savings payment.

Comment: While supporting our specific proposal to mitigate the impact of negative regional adjustments, MedPAC, consistent with their comments on the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (see 87 FR 69913), urged CMS to use the prior savings adjustment as a means to phase out the regional adjustment to the benchmark entirely. They suggested that the factor used in computing the prior savings adjustment (currently 50 percent) could be scaled up based on an ACO's regional efficiency. In addition to incorporating regional efficiency into the scaling factor used for the prior savings adjustment, MedPAC suggested that CMS could provide other incentives for current ACOs to remain in the program, such as scaling the shared savings rate based on efficiency and assuring protection from shared losses up to an amount equivalent to the current regional adjustment calculation.

Response: These comments go beyond the scope of policies proposed in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule. However, we will take these suggestions for alternative approaches to incorporating regional efficiency into the program's financial methodology into consideration along with other feedback we have received in response to our comment solicitation (refer to section III.G.8 of this final rule) as we contemplate potential future changes to the program's financial methodology. Should we decide that additional modifications to the program's financial methodology are needed, we would propose such changes through future notice and comment rulemaking.

After consideration of the public comments, we are finalizing our proposal to further mitigate impacts of negative regional adjustments. We are also finalizing our proposed revisions to provisions of the Shared Savings Program regulations specifying the calculation of the regional adjustment (§ 425.656), the calculation of the prior savings adjustment (§ 425.658), and the interaction between these adjustments (§ 425.652(a)(8)), with minor non-substantive modifications to the provisions at § 425.652(a)(8)(ii), (iii), and (iv)(B), and § 425.658(c) introductory text, for improved clarity and to ensure consistency of terminology across provisions.

Specifically, we are revising § 425.652 to specify how we will determine and apply the adjustment to an ACO's benchmark depending on whether the ACO is eligible for a prior savings adjustment and whether the ACO's regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is positive or negative. If the ACO is not eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment is positive, the ACO will receive an adjustment equal to the positive regional adjustment. If the ACO is eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment is positive, the ACO will receive an adjustment equal to the higher of the two adjustments. If the ACO is not eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment is zero or negative, the ACO will not receive an adjustment to its benchmark. If an ACO is eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment is zero or negative, the ACO will receive an adjustment equal to the prior savings adjustment.

We are revising § 425.656 to specify how we will express the regional adjustment as a single value and use this value in determining whether a regional adjustment or prior savings adjustment will be applied to the ACO's benchmark. We are revising § 425.658 to specify that we will calculate the per capita prior savings adjustment as the lesser of 50 percent of the pro-rated average per capita savings amount (computed as described in § 425.658(b)(3)(ii)) and the cap equal to 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for assignable beneficiaries for BY3 expressed as a single value. We are also finalizing as proposed the conforming revisions to provisions of subpart G, described in greater detail previously in this section of this final rule.

These changes will apply to agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

d. Modifications to the Prior Savings Adjustment

(1) Background

Under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act, an ACO's benchmark must be reset at the start of each agreement period using the most recent available 3 years of expenditures for Parts A and B services for beneficiaries assigned to the ACO. Section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act provides the Secretary with discretion to adjust the historical benchmark by such other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate. Under this authority, as described in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69898 through 69915), we established a prior savings adjustment that will apply when establishing the benchmark for ACOs entering a second agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, or in subsequent years, to account for the average per capita amount of savings generated during the ACO's prior agreement period.

The prior savings adjustment adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule is designed to adjust an ACO's benchmark to account for the average per capita amount of savings generated by the ACO across the 3 performance years prior to the start of its current agreement period for new and renewing ACOs. In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69899), we explained that reinstituting a prior savings adjustment would be broadly in line with our interest in addressing dynamics to ensure sustainability of the benchmarking methodology. Specifically, such an adjustment would help to mitigate the rebasing ratchet effect on an ACO's benchmark by returning to an ACO's benchmark an amount that reflects its success in lowering growth in expenditures while meeting the program's quality performance standard in the performance year's corresponding to the benchmark years for the ACO's new agreement period. We also explained our belief that a prior savings adjustment could help address an ACO's effects on expenditures in its regional service area that result in reducing the regional adjustment added to the historical benchmark.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69899), we explained that, in order to mitigate the potential for rebased benchmarks for ACOs that are lower-spending compared with their regional service area and that achieved savings in the benchmark period to become overinflated, we believed that adjusting an ACO's benchmark based on the higher of either the prior savings adjustment or the ACO's positive regional adjustment would be appropriate. Additionally, we believed it would be appropriate to use a prior savings adjustment to offset negative regional adjustments for ACOs that are higher spending compared to their regional service area. We noted that this would permit ACOs that are subject to a negative regional adjustment, but that have generated savings in prior years, to receive a relatively higher benchmark.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52473 and 52474), we explained that under the methodology finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule and codified at § 425.658 of the regulations, the prior savings adjustment that will apply in the establishment of benchmarks for renewing ACOs and re-entering ACOs entering an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, would be calculated as follows: 273

273 Because the discussion that follows describes the methodology for determining the prior savings adjustment as adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, it does not reflect the changes to further mitigate the negative regional adjustment that we proposed in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule. Please see section III.G.4.c of this final rule for a discussion of those proposals and our final policies to mitigate the negative regional adjustment for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

• Step 1: Calculate total per capita savings or losses in each performance year that constitutes a benchmark year for the current agreement period. For each performance year we will determine an average per capita amount reflecting the quotient of the ACO's total updated benchmark expenditures minus total performance year expenditures divided by performance year assigned beneficiary person years. CMS will apply the following requirements in determining the amount of per capita savings or losses for each performance year:

++ The per capita savings or losses will be set to zero for a performance year if the ACO was not reconciled for the performance year.

++ If an ACO generated savings for a performance year but was not eligible to receive a shared savings payment for that year due to noncompliance with Shared Savings Program requirements, the per capita savings for that year will be set to zero.

++ For a new ACO that is identified as a re-entering ACO, per capita savings or losses will be determined based on the per capita savings or losses of the ACO in which the majority of the ACO participants in the re-entering ACO were participating.

• Step 2: Calculate average per capita savings. Calculate an average per capita amount of savings by taking a simple average of the values for each of the 3 performance years as determined in Step 1, including values of zero, if applicable. We will use the average per capita amount of savings to determine the ACO's eligibility for the prior savings adjustment as follows:

++ If the average per capita value is less than or equal to zero, the ACO will not be eligible for a prior savings adjustment. The ACO will receive the regional adjustment to its benchmark.

++ If the average per capita value is positive, the ACO will be eligible for a prior savings adjustment.

• Step 3: Apply a proration factor to the per capita savings calculated in Step 2 equal to the ratio of the average person years for the 3 performance years that immediately precede the start of the ACO's current agreement period (regardless of whether these 3 performance years fall in one or more prior agreement periods), and the average person years in benchmark years for the ACO's current agreement period, capped at 1. If the ACO was not reconciled for one or more of the 3 years preceding the start of the ACO's current agreement period, the person years from that year (or years) will be excluded from the averages in the numerator and the denominator of this ratio. For a new ACO that is identified as a re-entering ACO, the person years of the ACO in which the majority of the ACO participants of the re-entering ACO were participating will be used in the numerator of the calculation. This ratio will be redetermined for each performance year during the agreement period in the event of any changes to the number of average person years in the benchmark years as a result of changes to the ACO's certified ACO participant list, a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection, or changes to the beneficiary assignment methodology.

• Step 4: Determine final adjustment to benchmark. Compare the pro-rated positive average per capita savings from Step 3 with the ACO's regional adjustment, determined as specified in the regulation at § 425.656, expressed as a single per capita value by taking a person-year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment type-specific regional adjustment values.

++ If the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is negative or zero, calculate the sum of the regional adjustment value and the pro-rated positive average per capita savings value and determine the final adjustment as follows:

—If the sum is positive, the ACO will receive a prior savings adjustment in place of the negative regional adjustment equal to the lesser of 50 percent of the sum of the pro-rated average per capita savings and the regional adjustment and 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare FFS program in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3. The adjustment will be applied as a flat dollar amount to the historical benchmark expenditures for each of the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

—If this sum is negative, this will constitute the amount of the negative regional adjustment applied to the ACO's historical benchmark. The adjustment will be applied as a flat dollar amount to the historical benchmark expenditures for the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

++ If the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value, is positive, the ACO will receive an adjustment to the benchmark equal to the higher of the following:

—The positive regional adjustment amount. The adjustment will be applied separately to the historical benchmark expenditures for each of the following populations of beneficiaries in accordance with § 425.656(c): ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

—A prior savings adjustment equal to the lesser of 50 percent of the pro-rated positive average per capita savings value and 5 percent of national per capita FFS expenditures for Parts A and B services in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3. The adjustment will be applied as a flat dollar amount to the historical benchmark expenditures for each of the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

As we explained in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69900) in calculating an ACO's average per capita prior savings over the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of its agreement period, we believe that a safeguard is needed to ensure that ACOs that achieved savings for a performance year that serves as a benchmark year for the current agreement period, but were ineligible to receive a shared savings payment due to noncompliance with Shared Savings Program requirements, are not subsequently eligible to have a portion of those savings included in their historical benchmark. Without such a safeguard, we would be rewarding an ACO, despite its noncompliance, through a higher benchmark in its subsequent agreement period. This would conflict with the sanction imposed on the ACO for its noncompliance during the performance year(s) of its prior agreement period. Accordingly, under the prior savings adjustment policy we finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, if an ACO was ineligible to share in savings for any performance year in the 3 performance years immediately preceding the start of its agreement period due to noncompliance with Shared Savings Program requirements, we will set at zero the per capita amount of savings for the affected performance year(s) when calculating the prior savings adjustment.

There are a variety of reasons that could result in an ACO's ineligibility to receive a shared savings payment due to noncompliance. In accordance with §§ 425.605(c)(2), and 425.610(c)(2), an ACO does not qualify to receive shared savings for a performance year if it failed to meet the quality performance standard as specified under § 425.512 or otherwise did not maintain its eligibility to participate in the Shared Savings Program. Furthermore, an ACO will not receive any shared savings payments during the time it is under a corrective action plan (CAP) for avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries and is not eligible to receive shared savings for the performance year attributable to the time that necessitated the CAP (the time period during which the ACO avoided at-risk beneficiaries) (refer to § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) and (C)).

In the CY 2023 PFS rulemaking to establish the current prior savings adjustment, we did not describe how we would account for certain circumstances where there could be changes to the values used in calculating the prior savings adjustment. Such changes could occur for changes in savings earned by ACOs in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) as a result of a compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or issuance of a revised initial determination of financial performance under § 425.315. If CMS determines that an ACO, its ACO participants, any ACO providers/suppliers, or other individuals or entities performing functions or services related to the ACO's activities avoids at-risk beneficiaries and requires the ACO to submit a CAP, the ACO will not receive any shared savings payments during the time it is under the CAP (§ 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B)), and it will not at any time be eligible to receive shared savings for the performance year attributable to the time that necessitated the CAP (§ 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(C)). Upon completion of an ACO's CAP for avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, CMS may release shared savings payments withheld from an ACO during the time it was under a CAP under § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B), so long as the shared savings are not attributable to the time that necessitated the CAP (that is, the time period during which the ACO avoided at-risk beneficiaries). Thus, depending on the timing of compliance actions undertaken by CMS, the amount of savings eligible for inclusion in the prior savings adjustment under § 425.658(b)(1), may change as a result of the compliance action. For instance, the total savings eligible for inclusion in the prior savings adjustment may increase after the completion of a CAP and release of a shared savings payment withheld under § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B). Further, if an initial determination of financial performance was already made and shared savings payments distributed and then the ACO was found to have avoided at-risk beneficiaries, and therefore, ineligible to receive a shared savings payment for the performance year, CMS would recoup the shared savings for the time period during which the ACO avoided at-risk beneficiaries. This latter scenario would result in a decrease in the total amount of savings eligible for inclusion in the prior savings adjustment calculation.

Further, if we determine that the amount of shared savings due to the ACO or the amount of shared losses owed by the ACO has been calculated in error, under § 425.315 CMS may reopen its prior determination and issue a revised initial determination: (1) at any time in the case of fraud or similar fault as defined in § 405.902; or (2) not later than 4 years after the date of the notification to the ACO of the initial determination of savings or losses for the relevant performance year, for good cause. If these situations—changes in the amount of shared savings for a prior performance year under § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) as a result of a compliance action due to the avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, or the issuance of a revised initial determination based on a reopening of ACO shared savings or shared losses under § 425.315—impact one of the 3 years prior to the start of the ACO's current agreement period, it is possible that the prior savings adjustment would no longer reflect the savings or losses achieved by the ACO during the applicable years. In the CY 2023 PFS rulemaking, we did not adopt a mechanism to account for these changes in the prior savings adjustment, but rather focused on changes to the prior savings adjustment related to changes in an ACO's participant list, changes to the ACO's assignment methodology selection, or changes to beneficiary assignment methodology under the Shared Savings Program as a whole.

(2) Revisions

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52474 through 52476), we proposed refinements to the prior savings adjustment calculation methodology, specified in 42 CFR part 425, subpart G, that would apply in the establishment of benchmarks for renewing ACOs and re-entering ACOs entering an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, to account for circumstances where the amount of savings or losses for a performance year used in the prior savings adjustment calculation changes retroactively. Specifically, we proposed to modify the list of circumstances for adjusting the historical benchmark in § 425.652(a)(9) to include two additional scenarios: a change in savings earned by an ACO in a benchmark year in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, or a change in the amount of savings or losses for a benchmark year as a result of a reopening of a prior determination of ACO shared savings or shared losses and the issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315. In these situations, the amount of savings or losses that an ACO may have generated in the 3 performance years prior to the start of the current agreement period and that would have been eligible for inclusion in the calculation of the prior savings adjustment may change. The refinements we proposed would allow for the prior savings adjustment to be recalculated and the historical benchmark to be adjusted to reflect the any change in the amount of savings earned or losses incurred by the ACO in the 3 performance years prior to its current agreement period that are eligible for inclusion in the calculation of the prior savings adjustment.

We proposed to modify the process described in § 425.652(a)(9) for adjusting the historical benchmark. Under the current regulation, an ACO may receive an adjusted historical benchmark because of changes in the ACO's assigned beneficiary population in the benchmark years of the ACO's current agreement period due to the addition and removal of ACO participants or ACO providers/suppliers in accordance with § 425.118(b), a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection under § 425.226(a)(1), 274 or changes to the beneficiary assignment methodology specified in 42 CFR part 425, subpart E. We proposed to modify § 425.652(a)(9) to indicate that an ACO would receive an adjusted historical benchmark for changes in values used in benchmark calculations in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315. More specifically, an ACO would receive an adjusted benchmark for the following reasons: (1) a change in the amount of savings calculated for any of an ACO's 3 benchmark years eligible for inclusion in the prior savings adjustment in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action taken to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, or (2) CMS issues a revised initial determination under § 425.315 that impacts the amount of savings or losses calculated for 1 of the ACO's benchmark years. In the proposed rule, we noted that a compliance action taken to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries may lead to a change in the amount of savings earned by an ACO for a previous performance year when CMS releases savings previously withheld under § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) for a time period other than the time period during which the ACO avoided at-risk beneficiaries following completion of a CAP or CMS recoups shared savings previously disbursed to an ACO under § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(C) for a time period during which the ACO is later determined to have avoided at-risk beneficiaries.

274 Refer to section III.G.7.a of the proposed rule for a description of the proposal to revise the current reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) in § 425.652(a)(9)(iv) to a reference to § 425.226(a)(1).

Only ACOs whose current benchmark includes a prior savings adjustment or whose benchmark would include an adjustment for prior savings following a change in the amount of savings earned for a previous performance year that is a benchmark year for the ACO's current agreement period would receive an adjusted benchmark under these proposed changes. Furthermore, we proposed to modify the process described in § 425.652(a)(9) to indicate that if either of these two conditions occur after the ACO has already received its historical benchmark for the first performance year of its agreement period, an ACO could receive an adjusted historical benchmark for the first year of its agreement period.

We also proposed to add a new paragraph (e) to § 425.658 to indicate that, when either of the two aforementioned scenarios occurs, the prior savings adjustment itself would be recalculated. We explained that without this addition there would be no mechanism for recalculating the prior savings adjustment to address changes in ACO's savings or losses for a performance year within an agreement period. Further, we proposed that, absent any other triggers for receiving an adjusted benchmark, an ACO would only receive an adjusted historical benchmark due to a change in the ACO's savings or losses for a performance year under §§ 425.315 or 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) if the change would result in a change to the prior savings adjustment as determined under § 425.652(a)(8). In other words, the ACO would not receive an adjusted historical benchmark following recalculation of the prior savings adjustment if the recalculation of the prior savings adjustment would not result in a change to the historical benchmark.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52475), we explained our belief that, to issue adjusted benchmarks and complete financial reconciliation in a timely fashion, it would be necessary to establish a timing cutoff for when the determination to issue an adjusted historical benchmark for these two additional reasons would be made. Each of the two scenarios for which we proposed to recalculate the prior savings adjustment may occur at any point during any performance year of the ACO's agreement period, as well as after the end of that agreement period. We proposed that for an adjusted benchmark due to the two conditions being considered to be used in financial reconciliation for a performance year, any determination under §§ 425.315 or 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) that changes the amount of the ACO's savings or losses in any of the benchmark years must be issued no later than the date of the initial determination of shared savings or shared losses through financial reconciliation for the relevant performance year under § 425.605(e) or § 425.610(h). We noted, however, that if we become aware of a potential change under § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) in the savings earned in a benchmark year by an ACO eligible for the prior savings adjustment or an upcoming revised initial determination under § 425.315 that could impact the determination of the ACO's savings or losses for a benchmark year, we might delay the initial determination of shared savings or shared losses for the ACO for the relevant performance year beyond when initial determinations would otherwise be issued in order to assess whether the ACO should receive an adjusted historical benchmark. Under this framework, changes to savings or losses for a benchmark year that are finalized after notification to the ACO of the initial determination of shared savings or shared losses for a given performance year would be reflected in the adjusted benchmark applied to any subsequent performance year during the relevant agreement period but would not be retroactively applied to completed performance years in the agreement period.

We considered several alternatives to the timing of when we could incorporate new information about a change in savings earned by an ACO in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) or a revised initial determination under § 425.315 into the prior savings adjustment. The two primary alternatives we considered were: (1) requiring information about a change to the amount of savings calculated for a previous year in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) or a revised initial determination under § 425.315 to become available by December 31st of the year prior to the performance year; and (2) considering this information at any time it becomes available. An advantage of the former option of requiring information by December 31st is that it would allow us to issue the adjusted benchmark in March of the performance year, consistent with when adjusted benchmarks are otherwise issued to ACOs. A disadvantage of this approach is that it would provide less flexibility for when new information impacting savings or losses in the benchmark years could be applied to the benchmark used in financial reconciliation for a given performance year. An advantage of the latter approach of considering such information at any time that it becomes available is that an ACO could receive an adjusted benchmark and a revised initial determination of shared savings or shared losses even after receiving its initial determination for a performance year. However, a disadvantage of this approach is that it would generate significant operational complexities. If, for instance, information becomes available during performance year four of an ACO's agreement period that would potentially impact financial reconciliation results in the first 3 performance years of the agreement period, we would need to simultaneously issue adjusted benchmarks and revised initial determinations for several performance years. In the proposed rule, we stated that on balance, we believed it would be appropriate to consider new information that could impact the prior savings adjustment up to the point at which an ACO receives its initial determination for a particular performance year. We noted that we were continuing to consider the complexities surrounding reopening initial determinations for multiple prior performance years throughout the program's benchmarking and financial reconciliation methodologies and may address this issue in future rulemaking.

We recognized that under § 425.658(b)(1)(iii), for a new ACO identified as re-entering ACO, the prior savings adjustment is based on the prior savings or losses of the ACO in which the majority of the ACO's ACO participants were participating. Accordingly, in the case of a re-entering ACO, we proposed to consider whether this prior ACO is impacted by the following when determining whether to issue an adjusted benchmark: (1) a change in the amount of savings calculated for any of the ACO's benchmark years eligible for inclusion in the prior savings adjustment in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries; or (2) a revised initial determination issued under § 425.315 that impacts the determination of the ACO's savings or losses for one of the benchmark years. In this case, other aspects of the proposal would apply similarly, including the timing cutoff for issuing an adjusted benchmark and issuing an adjusted benchmark only if the change in savings or losses determined for the applicable benchmark year would result in a change to the prior savings adjustment as determined under § 425.652(a)(8).

We included two examples to illustrate how an ACO could receive an adjusted historical benchmark that incorporates additional savings as a result of the changes we were proposing.

• Example 1: An ACO renews to begin a new agreement period on January 1, 2025 but is under a corrective action plan under § 425.316(b) for avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries during performance year 2023. In accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) the ACO did not receive a shared savings payment for performance year 2024, which represents the third benchmark year of its new agreement period. Therefore, the ACO's prior savings adjustment for its new agreement period would be calculated by setting the gross savings and losses for the third benchmark year equal to 0 as described in § 425.658(b)(1)(ii). However, in November of 2026 the corrective action plan for avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries is closed and CMS determines that the ACO is eligible to receive payment for shared savings for performance year 2024. In this example, the ACO would have previously received notification of the initial determination of shared savings or shared losses for performance year 2025. Because the change in the status of the corrective action plan occurred after the ACO received its initial determination of shared savings and shared losses for performance year 2025, savings from the ACO's third benchmark year would be included in the calculation of the prior savings adjustment beginning with the benchmark used to determine financial performance for performance year 2026. That is, the ACO would receive an adjusted historical benchmark for performance year 2026 reflecting the recalculated prior savings adjustment, and financial reconciliation for performance year 2026 and subsequent performance years of the ACO's current agreement period would reflect that adjusted historical benchmark. However, financial reconciliation for performance year 2025 would not be reopened to reflect savings from the third benchmark year in the calculation of the prior savings adjustment because the corrective action plan was not lifted until after the ACO received its initial determination of shared savings or shared losses for that performance year.

• Example 2: An ACO begins a new agreement period on January 1, 2026, and receives its historical benchmark, which includes a prior savings adjustment. In February of 2027, information is identified that leads to a revised initial determination of shared savings and shared losses for benchmark year 2 of the ACO's new agreement period. Because the issue was identified in February of the second performance year of the new agreement period, which is prior to the ACO receiving an initial determination of its shared savings and shared losses for performance year 2026, the ACO would receive an adjusted historical benchmark for performance year 2026. Shared savings and shared losses calculations for performance year 2026 would reflect the recalculated prior savings adjustment included in this adjusted benchmark. All subsequent performance years in the agreement period would also reflect the recalculated prior savings adjustment.

In summary, we proposed revisions to § 425.652(a)(9) to indicate that we would adjust the benchmark for changes in values used in benchmark calculations in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of the issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315. We also proposed to add new paragraph (e) to § 425.658 to specify that the ACO's prior savings adjustment is recalculated for changes to the ACO's savings or losses for a performance year used in the prior savings adjustment calculation in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315. Further, the new provision § 425.658(e) would also establish that for new re-entering ACOs, the prior savings adjustment will be recalculated for changes in savings or losses for a performance year used in the prior savings adjustment for the ACO in which a majority of the new ACO's ACO participants were previously participating.

We solicited comments on the proposal to adjust the historical benchmark to reflect changes in savings or losses for a performance year that constitutes a benchmark year for an ACO's current agreement period. These changes would be applicable for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024.

We received public comments on this proposal. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: We received several comments pertaining to the proposal to adjust the historical benchmark to reflect changes in savings or losses for a performance year that constitutes a benchmark year for an ACO's current agreement period. All comments supported the proposed changes, with several noting that the proposed policy increases program integrity without imposing undue burden on ACOs. We did not receive any comments opposing these changes.

Response: We agree with the commenters that the proposed provisions will improve the accuracy of the prior savings adjustment without placing additional burden on ACOs.

After consideration of the public comments, we are finalizing without modification the proposed refinements to the prior savings adjustment calculation methodology, specified in § 425.658, to account for circumstances where the amount of savings or losses for a performance year used in the prior savings adjustment calculation changes retroactively. This change will apply in the establishment of benchmarks for renewing ACOs and re-entering ACOs entering an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

We are finalizing the proposed revisions to § 425.652(a)(9) to include two additional circumstances under which we will adjust the historical benchmark: a change in savings earned by an ACO in a benchmark year in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, or a change in the amount of savings or losses for a benchmark year as a result of a reopening of a prior determination of ACO shared savings or shared losses and the issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315.

We also refer readers to section III.G.8.c. of this final rule for a summary of comments received in response to the RFI in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule regarding potential increases to the prior savings adjustment.

e. Update How Benchmarks Are Risk Adjusted

(1) Overview of Risk Adjustment Within Shared Savings Program Benchmark Calculations

When establishing, adjusting, and updating an ACO's historical benchmark, CMS makes certain adjustments to account for the severity and case mix of, and certain demographic factors for, the ACO's assigned beneficiary population and the assignable beneficiary population. We use prospective HCC risk scores and (as applicable) demographic risk scores to perform this risk adjustment.

To follow is a summary of the calculations in which we will account for the severity and case mix of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population or the assignable beneficiary population when establishing, adjusting, and updating the historical benchmark, for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, including as proposed elsewhere in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule.

• We risk adjust benchmark year expenditures used to establish the historical benchmark for changes in severity and case mix using prospective HCC risk scores, in accordance with § 425.652(a)(3). In making this adjustment, we account for changes in severity and case mix in the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between the first and third benchmark years and between the second and third benchmark years. 275

275 See, for example, Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications (version #11, January 2023), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-2 (see section 3.6, “Risk Adjustment Policies”).

• We calculate the ACO's regional FFS expenditures using risk adjusted county-level FFS expenditures, which are determined in accordance with § 425.654(a)(4) by adjusting FFS expenditures for severity and case mix of assignable beneficiaries in the county using prospective HCC risk scores and by making separate expenditure calculations for populations of beneficiaries by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries). The ACO's risk adjusted regional FFS expenditures are utilized in determining the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark (in accordance with § 425.656), the regional component of the national-regional blended trend factor (in accordance with § 425.652(a)(5)), and the regional component of the three-way blended benchmark update factor (in accordance with § 425.652(b)(2)).

• We calculate the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark in accordance with § 425.656, including the following calculations to account for severity and case mix:

++ We adjust for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for BY3 and the assignable population of beneficiaries for the ACO's regional service area for BY3 in accordance with § 425.656(b)(3).

++ In calculating the negative regional adjustment, we apply an offset factor based on the ACO's overall proportion of BY3 assigned beneficiaries who are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid (including dually eligible ESRD, disabled, and aged beneficiaries) and the ACO's weighted average prospective HCC risk score for BY3 taken across the four Medicare enrollment types, in accordance with § 425.656(c)(4).

• We adjust the ACO's historical benchmark to account for changes in severity and case mix in the ACO's assigned beneficiary population between BY3 and the performance year in accordance with §§ 425.652(a)(10), 425.605(a)(1) and (2) (BASIC track), and 425.610(a)(2) and (3) (ENHANCED track), at the time of financial reconciliation for a performance year. We use prospective HCC risk scores to adjust the historical benchmark for changes in severity and case mix for all assigned beneficiaries between BY3 and the performance year, with positive adjustments subject to a cap equal to the ACO's aggregate growth in demographic risk scores between BY3 and the performance year plus 3 percentage points (refer to §§ 425.605(a)(1)(ii) and 425.610(a)(2)(ii), and section III.G.4.b.(1) of the proposed rule).

• In calculating the regional component of the three-way blended update factor, we proposed to cap prospective HCC risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area between BY3 and the performance year by applying an adjustment factor, as discussed in section III.G.4.b.(2) of the proposed rule and the proposed new provision at § 425.655.

• We adjust the flat dollar amounts of the ACPT component of the three-way blended update factor for each performance year, for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's BY3 assigned beneficiary population and the national assignable FFS population for each Medicare enrollment type identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3, in accordance with § 425.660(b)(4).

(2) Background on Calculation of Prospective HCC Risk Scores Used to Risk Adjust Shared Savings Program Benchmark Calculations

(a) Historical Practices

We detailed how CMS performs Shared Savings Program risk adjustment calculations in programmatic material, including publicly available specifications documents. See, for example, Medicare Shared Savings Program, Shared Savings and Losses, Assignment and Quality Performance Standard Methodology Specifications (version #11, January 2023), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/medicare-shared-savings-program-shared-savings-and-losses-and-assignment-methodology-specifications.pdf-2 (see section 3.6, “Risk Adjustment Policies”). While we have specified the details of these practices in guidance, we have not previously codified these practices in regulation.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52477), we described that CMS maintains the CMS-HCC risk adjustment models for the Medicare Advantage (MA) program. CMS maintains CMS-HCC risk adjustment models for populations of beneficiaries based on age, disability status, gender, institutional status, eligibility for Medicaid, and health status (see section 1853(a)(1)(C)(i) of the Act), including a separate MA risk adjustment model for the ESRD population, and a Part D risk adjustment model (known as the RxHCC model). Over time, CMS has implemented revised versions of the CMS-HCC risk adjustment models (also referred to generally as the “CMS-HCC model”). Historically, transitions to a revised version of the CMS-HCC model have been gradually phased-in over time by blending the old risk adjustment model and the revised risk adjustment model. We specify the CMS-HCC risk adjustment models applicable for a calendar year in the annual MA Rate Announcement (see sections 1853(a)(1)(C) and (b)(1) of the Act). Prior to doing so, we solicited comments on the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology (see section 1853(b)(2) of the Act). Using the specified model, or blend of models (if applicable), we calculated prospective HCC risk scores for all Medicare beneficiaries, including FFS beneficiaries. These prospective HCC risk scores are then used to set MA capitation rates and Part C and D payment policies for the applicable calendar year.

To perform risk adjustment calculations for the Shared Savings Program, we calculate prospective HCC risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for the relevant benchmark year or performance year. In doing so, we use the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) that are applicable for the particular calendar year corresponding to the benchmark or performance year to identify a Medicare FFS beneficiary's prospective HCC risk score for that benchmark or performance year. Prospective HCC risk scores used in financial calculations for the Shared Savings Program have the MA coding pattern adjustment of 5.90 percent removed, if applicable. 276 Additionally, all prospective HCC risk scores are renormalized by Medicare enrollment type based on a national assignable FFS population to ensure that the mean risk score among assignable beneficiaries is equal to one. Renormalization helps to ensure consistency in risk scores from year to year, given changes made to the underlying risk score models. All risk adjustment calculations for the Shared Savings Program, including risk score renormalization, are performed separately for each Medicare enrollment type for the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible for Medicare and Medicaid, aged/non-dual eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. 277

276 The MA risk adjustment models used for beneficiaries classified as ESRD for the Shared Savings Program (that is, beneficiaries in long-term dialysis or transplant status, no more than three months post-graft) do not currently employ a coding intensity adjustment, therefore no adjustment is currently removed from risk scores for beneficiaries in the ESRD enrollment type.

277 A beneficiary's final risk score for each month is the risk score determined for that beneficiary based on the beneficiary's risk adjustment model status for that month. There are risk adjustment models for MA subpopulations (for example, community model versus institutional model versus new enrollee model for aged/non-dual eligible beneficiaries), and the risk scores used by the Shared Savings Program for beneficiaries in a Medicare enrollment type may be derived from more than one risk adjustment model.

Under the Shared Savings Program, we calculate demographic only risk scores using a separate model than those used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores. For agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and subsequent years, CMS will use demographic risk scores to determine the cap on risk score growth between BY3 and the performance year. Demographic risk scores consider only certain specified patient demographic factors, such as age, sex, Medicaid status, and the basis for Medicare entitlement (that is, age, disability, or ESRD), without incorporating diagnostic information. As such, demographic risk scores are not subject to changes in coding intensity or coding accuracy in the same way that prospective HCC risk scores are. We note that while the Shared Savings Program uses the same demographic factors as those used in MA, Shared Savings Program demographic factor coefficients are calibrated based on the entire Medicare FFS population instead of new Medicare enrollees as is used by MA.

Currently, when establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark, we account for changes in severity and case mix between benchmark years or between BY3 and the performance year by multiplying the expenditures for the applicable year by a quotient of two ACO-level renormalized risk scores, known as the risk ratio. For example, to risk adjust the expenditures for an ACO's assigned beneficiary population to account for changes in case mix and severity from the first benchmark year to the third, we multiply BY1 expenditures by a risk ratio equal to the mean renormalized risk score among the ACO's assigned beneficiaries in BY3 divided by the mean renormalized risk score among the ACO's assigned beneficiaries in BY1 for each Medicare enrollment type. For instance, a one percent rate of growth in renormalized risk scores between these benchmark years would be expressed by a risk ratio of 1.010. This ratio reflects growth in risk for the ACO's assigned beneficiary population relative to that of the national assignable population. Because the risk ratios used in benchmarking calculations may be determined using risk scores calculated from different underlying CMS-HCC risk adjustment models, depending on the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) applicable to the corresponding benchmark or performance year, this approach allows for the possibility that differences in risk models between the benchmark years and the performance year could impact an ACO's financial performance.

Since the inception of the Shared Savings Program in 2012, there have been several CMS-HCC model changes. Several factors reduce the impact of using different risk adjustment models to calculate prospective HCC risk scores for benchmark and performance years when performing Shared Savings Program risk adjustment calculations. One factor is that the Shared Savings Program renormalizes prospective HCC risk scores by Medicare enrollment type, which ensures that the mean risk score for the national assignable FFS population for each enrollment type is equal to one. If a new CMS-HCC model leads to a shift in the mean of the distribution of prospective HCC risk scores for the national assignable FFS population for a particular Medicare enrollment type, then renormalizing the risk scores would counterbalance this effect. Because renormalization factors are calculated across the assignable beneficiary population for each enrollment type, any adverse or beneficial impact for an ACO from a change in CMS-HCC model would derive from the mean risk score for the ACO's assigned beneficiaries within a given enrollment type being impacted in a systematically different way than the mean for the national assignable population for that enrollment type.

A second factor is that risk scores are used in multiple ways that balance their effects when establishing, adjusting, or updating a benchmark. Risk scores are used to adjust ACO expenditures and also to adjust regional expenditures used in calculating the regional adjustment to the benchmark and regional growth rates in benchmark calculations. Any impact of a new CMS-HCC model that could increase or decrease an ACO's risk scores used to establish, adjust, or update a benchmark may differ directionally from the impact that risk scores for the assignable FFS population in an ACO's regional service area might have on risk-adjusted regional expenditure calculations. For example, if a new CMS-HCC model lowers the risk ratio between BY3 and the PY, and therefore, lowers the benchmark for an ACO, all else equal, then the new risk adjustment model may also lower the risk scores for the ACO's regional service area assignable beneficiary population, which would increase risk-adjusted regional expenditures. 278 This would put upward pressure on the benchmark by increasing the regional update factor. Any changes to the ACO's risk ratio may be thus reduced by changes to the ACO's regional update factor. This would reduce the impact of CMS-HCC model changes on ACO financial performance.

278 For each county and Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible, and aged/non-dual eligible) in the ACO's regional service area, CMS divides average per capita county-level FFS expenditures by the county average renormalized CMS-HCC risk score to obtain risk-adjusted county expenditures.

A third factor is that CMS-HCC model transitions have been gradually phased-in over time by blending the old risk adjustment model and the new risk adjustment model, thereby constraining the magnitude of any change in risk ratios resulting from differences in the risk adjustment models used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores. That is, as a result of this blending, the risk ratios used to adjust expenditures between BY3 and the PY may have some degree of overlap in underlying risk adjustment models used to calculate both the numerator and denominator of the risk ratios.

(b) Introduction of the 2024 CMS-HCC Risk Adjustment Model, Version 28

On March 31, 2023, CMS released the Announcement of CY 2024 MA Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment Policies, 279 which finalized the transition to a revised CMS-HCC risk adjustment model. The revised 2024 CMS-HCC risk adjustment model, Version 28 (V28), has the same structure as the 2020 CMS-HCC risk adjustment model currently used for payment in that it has eight model segments as first implemented for payment for CY 2017 and condition count variables as first implemented for payment for CY 2020. It incorporates the following technical updates: (1) updated data years used for model calibration, (2) updated denominator year used in determining the average per capita predicted expenditures to create relative factors in the model, and (3) a clinical reclassification of the hierarchical condition categories (HCCs) using the International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM) codes. In addition, as part of the clinical reclassification, CMS conducted an assessment on conditions that are coded more frequently in MA relative to FFS. This assessment is consistent with Principle 10 of CMS's longstanding model principles, described in more detail initially in the December 2000 report titled, “Diagnostic Cost Group Hierarchical Condition Category Models for Medicare Risk Adjustment (Final Report)” (available at https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Reports/downloads/pope_2000_2.pdf ). As a result of this assessment, in addition to the technical updates, the revised model includes additional constraints and the removal of several HCCs to reduce the impact on risk score variation in coding between MA and FFS. 280

279 For more details, refer to Announcement of Calendar Year (CY) 2024 Medicare Advantage (MA) Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment Policies (March 31, 2023) (herein CY 2024 Rate Announcement), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2024-announcement-pdf.pdf .

280 See Advance Notice of Methodological Changes for Calendar Year (CY) 2024 for Medicare Advantage (MA) Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment Policies (February 1, 2023), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2024-advance-notice-pdf.pdf.

For CY 2024, MA risk scores will be calculated as a blend of 67 percent of the risk scores calculated under the 2020 CMS-HCC risk adjustment model, Version 24 (V24), and 33 percent of the risk scores calculated with the 2024 CMS-HCC risk adjustment model (V28). CMS expects that for CY 2025, MA risk scores will be calculated using a blend of 33 percent of the risk scores calculated with V24 and 67 percent of the risk scores calculated with V28, and for CY 2026, 100 percent of risk scores will be calculated with V28. 281

281 See CY 2024 Rate Announcement, available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2024-announcement-pdf.pdf at 3.

With the transition to the use of the V28 CMS-HCC model beginning in CY 2024 in MA, it is timely to revisit how we apply the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) to calculate risk scores used in Shared Savings Program calculations. As summarized in the CY 2024 Rate Announcement, some commenters questioned if the updated MA risk adjustment model will affect lines of business outside of Medicare Advantage such as the ACO REACH Model and Medicare Shared Savings Program. In response to these comments, we explained that we were considering the implications of these changes to the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model for these initiatives. 282

282 See id. at 97.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule we described our initial analysis of the impact of the V28 CMS-HCC model on Shared Savings Program calculations, including modeling of an alternative approach to calculating benchmark year risk scores (88 FR 52479 through 52481). We proposed an approach to making such calculations for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

(3) Initial Analysis of the Impact of Risk Adjustment Model Changes on Shared Savings Program Calculations and Modeling of an Alternative Approach to Calculating Benchmark Year Risk Scores

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52479), we noted that to further evaluate the potential impact of the V28 CMS-HCC model transition on Shared Savings Program ACOs, we analyzed the following:

• Our current approach in which we apply the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) applicable for a particular calendar year to calculate a Medicare FFS beneficiary's prospective HCC risk score for the corresponding benchmark or performance year. This approach could lead to different CMS-HCC risk adjustment models being used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores for the benchmark years as compared to a particular performance year of the ACO's agreement period when there is a transition to a new CMS-HCC risk adjustment model between one or more benchmark years and the performance year.

• An alternative approach in which we would use the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) applicable to the calendar year corresponding to the performance year to calculate a Medicare FFS beneficiary's prospective HCC risk score for the performance year, and for each benchmark year of the ACO's agreement period. 283 This approach ensures consistency between the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology used to calculate the prospective HCC risk scores for the benchmark years relative to a particular performance year.

283 A similar approach was suggested by commenters in earlier rulemaking for the Shared Savings Program. See, for example, the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68013), in which we summarize commenters' recommendation that CMS modify the current methodology to use the same CMS-HCC risk score model to calculate risk scores for both the benchmark years and the performance year.

To conduct this analysis, we calculated prospective HCC risk scores and risk ratios for CY 2018 (treated as BY3) and CY 2021 (treated as the PY) for all 275 ACOs that participated in both PY 2018 and PY 2021. Risk ratios between BY3 and the PY were calculated under the current approach, in which we used the V24 CMS-HCC model to calculate BY3 prospective HCC risk scores and the V28 CMS-HCC model to calculate PY prospective HCC risk scores, and under the alternative approach of calculating both BY and PY prospective HCC risk scores using V28. 284

284 The V24 CMS-HCC model was not applicable to CY 2018 but was used in this analysis to calculate BY3 prospective HCC risk scores under the current approach to measure the impact of the transition from V24 to V28 on Shared Savings Program ACOs.

We performed this analysis to roughly estimate how V28 would have impacted payment to ACOs in PY 2021 using weighted average risk scores calculated across the three non-ESRD Medicare enrollment types (disabled, aged/dual eligible, aged/non-dual eligible). The analysis provides insight into the impact of a fully phased-in V28, which is expected to occur in PY 2026 (particularly for ACOs that would at that point have a BY3 prior to 2024). For the 275 ACOs in the sample, combined PY 2021 shared savings payments would have been about 11 percent lower than actual payments if V28 had been fully phased-in for the performance year, when using V24 to calculate BY3 prospective HCC risk scores (reflecting the current approach to applying CMS-HCC risk adjustment models). Alternatively, combined shared savings payments would have been about 2 percent higher than actual if V28 were used for BY3 calculations, as well as for PY 2021 calculations (reflecting the alternative approach to applying CMS-HCC risk adjustment models).

Table 44 compares the estimated impact on PY 2021 shared savings of the current approach, and the alternative approach to calculating BY3 and PY prospective HCC risk scores.

Estimated decreases in PY 2021 shared savings payments are more extreme at the tail of the distribution when using the current approach. Over 10 percent of ACOs showed more than 1.4 percent in reduced shared savings payments relative to benchmark under the modeling of the current approach, in which we used V24 to calculate BY3 prospective HCC risk scores and V28 to calculate PY prospective HCC risk scores. In contrast, about 3 percent of ACOs showed declines of such magnitude in shared savings payments relative to the benchmark using the alternative approach to calculating prospective HCC risk scores for BY3 and PY 2021 with the V28 CMS-HCC model. Compared to the alternative approach, the current approach is estimated to result in a reduction in shared savings of about 0.2 percent per ACO on average, relative to benchmark. These impacts would be smaller, potentially one-third of the magnitude, if the use of V24 in BY3 was compared to the blend of 33 percent V28 and 67 percent V24 for the PY (reflecting the blend applicable for CY 2024).

Table 45 compares the estimated impact on PY 2021 shared savings of the current approach, and the alternative approach to calculating BY3 and PY risk scores (expressed as percentage of benchmark), based on the following ACO characteristics: ACO average renormalized prospective HCC risk scores for aged/disabled beneficiaries, ACO participation in performance-based risk, and year of entry into the Shared Savings Program. We observed that the current approach would have the greatest adverse effect on ACOs with the highest average risk scores (calculated with the V24 CMS-HCC model), ACOs participating in two-sided models, and ACOs that have been in the Shared Savings Program longer. ACOs that would not have been harmed by the current approach had an average renormalized risk score for their non-ESRD populations roughly equal to 1.00. The 5 percent of ACOs in the modeling with the most adverse impact from the current approach had an average renormalized risk score for their non-ESRD populations of 1.22. For ACOs with the highest average risk scores, the modeling showed the current approach would have resulted in reduced shared savings of about 2 percent (relative to benchmark) per ACO, as compared to the alternative approach. The most adversely impacted ACOs in the modeling also were roughly 40 percent more likely to participate in a two-sided model and to have participated in the Shared Savings Program nearly 2 years longer than ACOs not harmed. The modeling demonstrates that the alternative approach would reduce the negative impact that the current approach shows for ACOs with high-risk scores, with earlier entry dates into the Shared Savings Program, and with participation in a two-sided model.

In the context of the transition to the V28 CMS-HCC model, the results of this analysis show that the current approach to calculating prospective HCC risk scores is expected to adversely impact ACO financial performance, particularly for ACOs that serve a high-risk beneficiary population, when compared to the stated alternative approach. We explained that factors discussed in the proposed rule (as described in section III.G.4.e.(2) of the proposed rule)—renormalizing risk scores to the national assignable FFS population, risk-adjusted regional expenditures providing a counterbalance to how risk ratios impact the benchmark, and the phased transition from V24 to V28 by means of a blended risk model—will reduce the impact of a risk adjustment model transition. However, these factors will be insufficient to prevent adverse effects on ACO financial performance due to the larger impact from the transition to V28 relative to prior CMS-HCC model transitions. The alternative policy under which CMS would apply the same CMS-HCC risk adjustment model used in the performance year to calculate prospective HCC risk scores for all benchmark years would strengthen risk adjustment in the Shared Savings Program and consistently apply the CMS-HCC model in the Shared Savings Program context as it is applied in MA.

(4) Revisions

The adoption of the alternative approach to calculating prospective HCC risk scores for the performance year and each benchmark year of an ACO's agreement period would allow us to more accurately measure the change in severity and case mix for an ACO's assigned beneficiary population or the assignable beneficiary population. Under such an approach, there would be no potential for distortion from using different CMS-HCC risk adjustment models in calculating prospective HCC risk scores for benchmark years and the performance year that could occur under the current policy. For this reason, we proposed to modify our current use of the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model and adopt the alternative approach to calculating prospective HCC risk scores for a performance year and the relevant benchmark years for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

We proposed to add a new section to our regulations at § 425.659, which would codify our existing framework for calculating risk scores used in Shared Savings Program benchmark calculations and adopt the alternative approach to calculating prospective HCC risk scores for a performance year and the relevant benchmark years (88 FR 52481 through 52483). We proposed in paragraph (a) of § 425.659 to codify our current practice of accounting for differences in severity and case mix of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries and assignable beneficiaries (as defined under § 425.20) in calculations used in establishing, adjusting, and updating the ACO's historical benchmark.

We proposed to set forth in paragraph (b) of § 425.659 our approach to determining Medicare FFS beneficiary prospective HCC risk scores for Shared Savings Program benchmark and performance year calculations (88 FR 52481). In paragraph (b)(1) of § 425.659, we proposed to codify our current policy under which CMS specifies the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries (as defined under § 425.20) for use in Shared Savings Program calculations. Additionally, we proposed:

• To codify our current practice of calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for a performance year, which provides that CMS uses the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology applicable for the corresponding calendar year.

• To codify our current practice for agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, of applying the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology for the calendar year corresponding to benchmark year in calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for each benchmark year of the agreement period.

• For agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, CMS would apply the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology for the calendar year corresponding to the performance year in calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for each benchmark year of the agreement period.

We proposed at § 425.659(b)(2) to codify our current practices for calculating prospective HCC risk scores for a benchmark or performance year (88 FR 52482). Specifically, in calculating prospective HCC risk scores, we would remove the MA coding intensity adjustment, if applicable. Further, we would renormalize prospective HCC risk scores by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries) based on a national assignable FFS population for the relevant benchmark or performance year. We would calculate the average prospective HCC risk score by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries) in order to risk adjust benchmark calculations also performed by Medicare enrollment type.

We did not propose to modify the current approach to calculating demographic risk scores under the Shared Savings Program (88 FR 52482).

We also proposed to adjust the benchmark to account for CMS-HCC risk adjustment model changes during the term of the agreement period to maintain uniformity between the calculation of prospective HCC risk scores for the performance year and each benchmark year (88 FR 52482). We proposed to revise the list of circumstances for adjusting the historical benchmark for the second and each subsequent performance year during the term of the agreement period at § 425.652(a)(9) to include a change in the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores under proposed, new § 425.659. We further proposed to add a new paragraph (a)(9)(vi) to § 425.652 to specify that we would redetermine factors based on prospective HCC risk scores calculated for benchmark years by calculating the prospective HCC risk scores using the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology that applies for the calendar year corresponding to the applicable performance year in accordance with proposed § 425.659(b)(1).

We also proposed a technical and conforming change to § 425.650(a), which generally describes the organization of the sections on the benchmarking methodology within subpart G of the Shared Savings Program regulations (88 FR 52482). In the description of the benchmarking methodology applicable for agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, we proposed to update the list of referenced sections to include the proposed new § 425.659.

We stated in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52482), that this proposed policy would address the concerns of ACOs and other interested parties regarding the transition to the V28 CMS-HCC model or other similar future changes to CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology that could occur during the term of an ACO's agreement period. Under the proposal, both the numerator and denominator in the PY/BY3 risk ratio would be calculated using a consistent risk model, and any distributional impacts should, on average, be balanced. This would prevent distortion to historical benchmarks resulting from model changes. This conclusion was informed by the data analysis described in the proposed rule (88 FR 52479 through 52481), which shows that on average ACOs would have earned roughly 0.2 percent in additional PY 2021 shared savings payments relative to benchmark when both benchmark year and performance year prospective HCC risk scores are calculated under V28 compared to calculations under both V24 and V28.

Our analysis showed that ACOs with higher than average risk scores would benefit from using the proposed approach to calculate BY and PY prospective HCC risk scores relative to the current policy. The proposal would therefore help the Shared Savings Program retain ACOs serving the highest risk beneficiaries. This is a priority for CMS as high-risk beneficiaries may benefit the most from better care coordination and quality improvement activities, particularly by ACOs with above average duration of participation in the program. Similarly, the proposed approach would support potential participation from new ACOs that would consider whether risk adjustment calculations in the Shared Savings Program benchmarking methodology would be adequate for beneficiaries with the highest risk.

The proposal would not affect how prospective HCC risk scores are calculated for ACOs in agreement periods that began prior to January 1, 2024, consistent with our historical practice of incorporating changes to the benchmarking methodology only at the start of an ACO's agreement period. We explained that ACOs in an existing agreement period that includes performance year 2024, 2025 or 2026 may benefit from the factors discussed in the proposed rule (88 FR 52478 through 52479)—renormalizing risk scores to the national assignable FFS population, risk-adjusted regional expenditures providing a counterbalance to how risk ratios impact the benchmark, and the phased transition from V24 to V28 by means of a blended risk model. These factors would diminish adverse effects of using the new CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology in Shared Savings Program calculations.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52482), we stated that if we finalized the proposed approach for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, an ACO in an existing agreement period could choose to terminate its participation agreement early, to early renew under a new participation agreement to be under the revised approach. For instance, an ACO under an existing agreement period with the current methodology (with a 2022 or 2023 start date) could apply to early renew with the application cycle for the January 1, 2025 agreement period start date, which would occur during CY 2024. For an existing ACO that applied to early renew and enters a new agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, the proposed policy, if finalized, would apply to the ACO's new agreement period. Any ACO that early renews would have its benchmark rebased at the start of the new agreement period.

The following examples, based on the first 3 years of a 5-year agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, illustrate the applicability of the current approach to calculating BY and PY prospective HCC risk scores using different CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s), as compared to the proposed approach to calculating both BY and PY prospective HCC risk scores using the same CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s). Under the current policy an ACO beginning a new agreement period on January 1, 2024, would have its prospective HCC risk scores for BY1 (2021) calculated using a blend of 25 percent under the 2014 CMS-HCC model, Version 22 (V22), and 75 percent V24, 285 and for BY2 (2022) and BY3 (2023) calculated using V24. 286 287 For PY1 (2024), prospective HCC risk scores would be calculated using a blend of 67 percent V24 and 33 percent V28. For PY2 (2025), prospective HCC risk scores are expected to be calculated using a blend of 33 percent V24 and 67 percent V28. For PY3 (2026), prospective HCC risk scores are expected to be calculated using V28. Under the current methodology, the risk ratios used to risk adjust expenditures would have the numerator and denominator calculated using different underlying CMS-HCC risk adjustment models. Specifically, to risk adjust BY1 expenditures to BY3 when establishing or adjusting the ACO's historical benchmark, the risk ratio would include risk scores calculated under V24 (BY3) and a blend of 25 percent V22 and 75 percent V24 (BY1). To risk adjust BY3 expenditures to the performance year when updating the historical benchmark during financial reconciliation, risk ratios would include risk scores calculated under V24 (as applicable to BY3) and either a blend of V24 and V28 (for PY1 and as expected for PY2) or fully calculated with V28 (as expected for PY3).

285 For more details, refer to Announcement of Calendar Year (CY) 2021 Medicare Advantage (MA) Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment Policies (April 6, 2020), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2021-announcement.pdf .

286 For more details, refer to Announcement of Calendar Year (CY) 2022 Medicare Advantage (MA) Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment Policies (January 15, 2021), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2022-announcement.pdf . 287 For more details, refer to Announcement of Calendar Year (CY) 2023 Medicare Advantage (MA) Capitation Rates and Part C and Part D Payment Policies (April 4, 2022), available at https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2023-announcement.pdf .

Under the proposed approach, BY and PY prospective HCC risk scores would be calculated under the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) applicable to the calendar year corresponding to the relevant performance year. For an ACO beginning a new agreement period on January 1, 2024, in PY1 (2024) all benchmark year and PY1 prospective HCC risk scores would be calculated using a blend of 67 percent V24 and 33 percent V28. In PY2 (2025), all benchmark year and PY2 prospective HCC risk scores are expected to be calculated using a blend of 33 percent V24 and 67 percent V28. In PY3 (2026), all benchmark year and performance year prospective HCC risk scores are expected to be calculated using V28. In the case of an ACO in an existing agreement period that early renews for a new agreement period beginning on January 1, 2025, the calculations described in this paragraph regarding the blend of V24 and V28 for 2025 and the fully phased-in V28 CMS-HCC model for 2026 would be expected to apply for the ACO's first and second performance years (respectively).

We solicited comments on these proposals regarding the prospective HCC risk scores to be used in risk adjustment for purposes of benchmark calculations under the Shared Savings Program.

We received public comments on these proposals. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: Several commenters expressed general support for and appreciation of the proposed changes to how risk adjustment is performed for purposes of benchmark calculations under the Shared Savings Program. These commenters noted that they believe that using a consistent risk score model for both benchmark years and the performance year will improve predictability in risk scores, as well as prevent distortion to an ACO's historical benchmark resulting from changes in the risk score model.

Response: We agree with commenters that using a consistent risk score model for both benchmark years and the performance year will more accurately assess changes in an ACO's assigned beneficiary population across years.

Comment: Many commenters supported the proposed changes but urged CMS to apply the proposed changes to all ACOs and not just to ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024. Other commenters urged CMS to allow ACOs in existing agreement periods that began prior to January 1, 2024, be given an option to choose whether the proposed changes to the risk adjustment methodology will apply to them. Many commenters stated that the proposed rule was made public after the deadline to early renew to begin a new agreement period on January 1, 2024. They stated that knowledge of the proposed changes to risk adjustment methodology would have informed any decision to early renew. Several commenters referred to CMS' data analysis in section III.G.4.e.(3) of the proposed rule which showed that total PY 2021 shared savings payments would have been 11 percent lower when performance year risk scores were calculated using V28. These commenters discussed that maintaining the current risk adjustment methodology for ACOs in agreement periods that began prior to January 1, 2024, would unfairly harm such ACOs, especially those serving high-risk beneficiary populations. A few commenters also noted that while there is an option to early renew to begin a new agreement period on January 1, 2025, there are administrative costs associated with the early renewal application process which may be prohibitive for some ACOs. Several commenters also noted that if an ACO decides to early renew, their benchmark will be rebased for the new agreement period and some ACOs may be harmed by the `ratchet effect' in which any savings generated in the current agreement period could lead to a lower benchmark in the new agreement period.

Response: The data analysis presented in the proposed rule (88 FR 52479 through 52481) examines the impact of adopting the full V28 CMS-HCC risk adjustment model which is not expected to occur until 2026. While the results of the data analysis suggest combined PY 2021 shared savings payments would have been about 11 percent lower than actual payments if V28 had been fully phased-in for the performance year, this 11 percent is larger in magnitude than the actual impact for PY 2024 for ACOs continuing in an existing agreement period under the current risk adjustment methodology. The impact will be significantly reduced since the risk adjustment model implemented for PY 2024 will be a blend of 67 percent V24 and 33 percent V28. The magnitude of the impact on ACOs for PY 2024 might only be one-third of what was estimated in the analyses included in the proposed rule, because those analyses looked at the fully implemented V28 risk model (88 FR 52480). Table 46 shows the estimated impacts of the PY 2024 blended CMS-HCC model on PY 2021 Shared Savings under both the current and proposed risk adjustment methodologies (where the current approach will be applied for PY 2024 calculations only for ACOs with agreement periods that started before January 1, 2024).

Further, the analyses in the proposed rule only examined the impact of ACO risk scores on the risk ratios used to update the benchmark at the time of financial reconciliation. These risk ratios are calculated as the performance year prospective CMS-HCC risk scores divided by BY3 prospective CMS-HCC risk scores. Under the current policy, which will only apply to ACOs in agreement periods that started before January 1, 2024, the BY3 prospective CMS-HCC risk scores will not be recalculated using the new V28 model. The V28 model is expected to, on average, lower ACO prospective CMS-HCC risk scores which caused a fall in the risk ratios. Under the current approach, this then led to lower updated benchmarks which resulted in worsened average ACO financial performance in our analysis. However, as mentioned previously, there are other ways in which an ACO's prospective CMS-HCC risk scores impact financial calculations. One important way is in the calculation of an ACO's regional adjustment to their historical benchmark. When determining the amount of an ACO's regional adjustment, the ACO's BY3 prospective CMS-HCC risk scores are used to multiply risk-adjusted regional expenditures. Under the proposed policy, all benchmark year risk scores will be calculated using the MA risk adjustment model applicable to the performance year. If the proposed policy were applied to ACOs in existing agreement periods, all BY3 risk scores for such ACOs would be recalculated using the PY 2024 blended model of 67 percent V24 and 33 percent V28. As the blended model, through the V28 component, is expected to lower average ACO prospective CMS-HCC risk scores, this would tend to decrease the amount of the regional adjustment. This would in turn offset some (or potentially all) of the reduction in benchmark that some ACOs would receive by not extending the proposed policy to ACOs in agreement periods that started before January 1, 2024. When we reviewed the ACOs that are most likely to see a decrease in their performance year risk scores, we also found these same ACOs would generally have the most favorable regional adjustments to their historical benchmarks, so the existing methodology would help them avoid negative impacts that would otherwise materialize from recalculation of those adjustments under the new risk model. Lastly, we note that risk scores continue to be renormalized across the assignable population in each eligibility group, which eliminates the risk that risk scores would be systematically biased against ACOs under either the current or proposed approaches described above. Due to these factors, we believe that the impact of the phased transition of V28 on financial performance for PY 2024 for ACOs in existing agreement periods will be lower than expressed by many commenters.

We also note that while the analysis in the proposed rule showed that on average ACOs would benefit from the proposed risk adjustment policy, this was not universal. In comparing the current and alternative approaches to calculating prospective CMS-HCC risk scores, the median value for the difference between the two approaches was 0.0 percent. While the mean impact on ACOs was negative, this was due to the larger impact on adversely affected ACOs rather than the number of ACOs that were adversely affected. In our analysis we found the proposed methodology would reduce benchmarks for at least 25 percent of ACOs in existing agreement periods. Due to this, applying the proposed policy to all ACOs in PY 2024 even those continuing in an existing agreement period, would slightly benefit some ACOs while marginally harming others. The Shared Savings Program's longstanding approach is to maintain a consistent benchmarking methodology for the duration of an ACO's agreement period because methodological changes can have varying impacts on ACO's benchmarks and performance.

Further, we do not believe it is desirable to implement an approach that would allow each ACO to select from a menu of options for customizing the benchmark methodology that would apply in any given performance year during an agreement period. Historically, we have not applied changes to the benchmark methodology during an agreement period, and as we have discussed in prior rulemaking (see, for example, 87 FR 69876), we have particular concern about allowing ACOs to “opt in” to certain benchmarking policies within an agreement period, as this creates an opportunity for selective behavior without the counterbalance of rebasing and introduces significant operational complexity. An approach that allows an ACO to choose the more favorable of several methodologies for establishing its cost target would exacerbate our concerns about the potential for benchmarks to become overly inflated to the point where ACOs need to do little to maintain or change their care practices to generate savings. We are concerned that this flexibility could lead to opportunities for arbitrage and may dull incentives for ACOs to improve their performance under the Shared Savings Program. Further, doing so would introduce considerable operational complexity into the program's benchmarking methodology.

During CY 2024, ACOs have the option to “early renew” for PY 2025, meaning to terminate their current participation agreement under § 425.220 and immediately enter a new agreement period to continue participation in the Shared Savings Program. (See paragraph (2) of the definition of “renewing ACO” in § 425.20, and 83 FR 67885 through 67890, and the application procedures set forth in § 425.224.) Early renewal would allow a currently participating ACO to be subject to the modified financial benchmarking methodology policies described in sections III.G.4.b-d and to the modified risk adjustment methodology sooner than if the ACO were to wait to renew to continue its participation in the Shared Savings Program after completing its current agreement period of at least 5 years. We believe that ACOs that elect to renew or early renew for PY 2025 would have sufficient time to decide whether to renew for a new agreement period under the Shared Savings Program, for providers/suppliers to consider the business case for forming or joining a Shared Savings Program ACO, and for CMS to prepare to implement these changes.

Comment: One commenter appeared to misunderstand what was being proposed, stating that they interpreted the proposed policy as introducing the MA risk adjustment models to the Shared Savings Program. They also interpreted the data analysis in section III.G.4.e.(3) of the proposed rule showing the impact of using V24 to calculate benchmark year prospective HCC risk scores and V28 to calculate performance year prospective HCC risk scores as measuring the impact of our proposed policy. They expressed concern that the use of different risk score models would lead to deviations in the uniformity of risk assessment which might diminish trust in the Shared Savings Program.

Response: We clarify that the current Shared Savings Program risk adjustment methodology calculates benchmark and performance year risk scores using the MA risk adjustment models that were applicable to the relevant calendar year. Under this approach, this may lead to situations in which benchmark and performance year risk scores are calculated under separate CMS-HCC risk score models. We proposed to revise the risk adjustment methodology to use the MA risk adjustment model that is applicable to the performance year to calculate both performance year and benchmark year prospective CMS-HCC risk scores. The proposed approach aims to ensure uniformity in risk assessment across multiple years by calculating prospective CMS-HCC risk scores using a consistent risk adjustment model.

After consideration of the public comments, we are finalizing our proposal to apply the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology for the calendar year corresponding to the performance year in calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for each benchmark year of the agreement period, for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024. We are finalizing our proposal to add a new section to our regulations at § 425.659 on calculating risk scores used in Shared Savings Program benchmark calculations, with minor modifications for grammar and clarity. We are also finalizing our proposal to revise the list of circumstances for adjusting the historical benchmark for the second and each subsequent performance year during the term of the agreement period at § 425.652(a)(9) to include a change in the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology used to calculate prospective CMS-HCC risk scores under new § 425.659. Further, we are finalizing our proposal to add a new paragraph (a)(9)(vi) to § 425.652 to specify that we will redetermine factors based on prospective HCC risk scores calculated for benchmark years by calculating the prospective HCC risk scores using the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology that applies for the calendar year corresponding to the applicable performance year in accordance with § 425.659(b)(1). We are finalizing as proposed a technical and conforming change to § 425.650(a), to revise the description of the benchmarking methodology applicable for agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, to include the new § 425.659 within the list of referenced sections.

5. Modifications to Advance Investment Payment Policies

a. Overview

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69782 through 69805), we finalized a new payment option for eligible Shared Savings Program ACOs entering agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2024, to receive advance shared savings payments. This payment option is referred to as advance investment payment (AIP) and the payments themselves are referred to as advance investment payments.

In that final rule, we explained that section 1899(i) of the Act authorizes the Secretary to use other payment models instead of the one-sided model described in section 1899(d) of the Act so long as the Secretary determines that the other payment model would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries without additional program expenditures (87 FR 69783 and 69784). In accordance with section 1899(i) of the Act, we determined that making advance investment payments to certain ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries by enhancing the accessibility of the Shared Savings Program ( Id. ).

We established standards for an ACO's receipt and use of advance investment payments within the Shared Savings Program regulations at § 425.630 and specified requirements in connection with AIP in other sections within 42 CFR part 425. Such standards include: eligibility criteria to limit AIP to new, low revenue ACOs that are inexperienced with performance-based risk; application procedures and contents, including submission of a spend plan; policies governing use and management of payments; amount and frequency of payments, which are comprised of a one-time $250,000 upfront payment and up to 8 quarterly payments; the methodology for calculation of the quarterly payment amount based on the ACO's assigned population; termination of advance investment payments, as well as recoupment and recovery of advance investment payments; policies to monitor ACO eligibility for AIP; and ACO public reporting requirements regarding the use of advance investment payments.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52483), we proposed modifications to refine AIP policies to better prepare for initial implementation of AIP beginning with ACOs entering agreement periods on January 1, 2024. In summary, we proposed to better support ACOs that are prepared to progress to performance-based risk by allowing ACOs to advance to two-sided model Levels within the BASIC track's glide path beginning in PY3 of the agreement period in which they receive advance investment payments (88 FR 52483). We also proposed to revise our policies for recoupment of advance investment payments from ACOs that wish to early renew and continue their participation in the Shared Savings Program (88 FR 52485). We proposed to specify that CMS would terminate quarterly advance investment payments in future quarters to ACOs that elect to terminate their participation in the Shared Savings Program (88 FR 52486). We proposed to require ACOs to report spend plan updates and actual spend information to CMS in addition to publicly reporting such information (88 FR 52484). Lastly, we proposed to codify that ACOs receiving advance investment payments may seek reconsideration review of all payment calculations (88 FR 52487). If finalized, we proposed that these policies would be effective beginning January 1, 2024 (88 FR 52488).

b. Modifications to AIP Eligibility Requirements to Allow ACOs to Advance to Performance-Based Risk During the 5-Year Agreement Period

(1) Background

The policies we finalized with the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69404) require an ACO to remain under a one-sided risk model for the duration of its agreement period in which it receives advance investment payments to remain compliant with AIP requirements. The ACO would otherwise face potential compliance action and may be required to repay all advance investment payments within 90 days of receiving written notification from CMS. This limits an ACO's ability to select participation options that include progression along the BASIC track's glide path to a performance-based two-sided risk model. This policy arises from the interaction of numerous standards.

First, an ACO is eligible to receive advance investment payments if CMS determines that all of the following criteria are met: (1) the ACO is not a renewing or a re-entering ACO; (2) the ACO has applied to participate in the Shared Savings Program under any level of the BASIC track's glide path and is eligible to participate in the Shared Savings Program; (3) the ACO is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives; and (4) the ACO is a low revenue ACO (§ 425.630(b)). An eligible ACO will receive a one-time upfront payment of $250,000 and quarterly payments each quarter for the first 2 performance years of the ACO's 5-year agreement period, totaling no more than 8 quarterly payments (§ 425.630(f)).

Second, under § 425.630(h), CMS will terminate an ACO's advance investment payments in accordance with § 425.316(e) if the ACO is no longer inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or is no longer a low revenue ACO. Section 425.316(e) specifies that if CMS determines during any performance year of the agreement period that an ACO receiving advance investment payments is experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or is a high revenue ACO, and the ACO remains experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or a high revenue ACO after a deadline specified by CMS pursuant to compliance action, the ACO must repay all advance investment payments it received.

An eligible ACO that joins the Shared Savings Program in Level A of the BASIC track and opts to receive advance investment payments will be eligible for all 8 quarterly payments to be paid over PY1 and PY2, so long as the ACO remains in Level A (or progresses to Level B) in PY2 and remains inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives and a low revenue ACO. An ACO that joins the Shared Savings Program at Levels B through E of the BASIC track, however, will not be eligible to receive all 8 quarters of advance investment payments because current program regulations require that an ACO remain inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives while receiving advance investment payments (§ 425.630(h)(2)). More specifically, if an ACO receiving advance investment payments elects to participate at Level B of the BASIC track in PY1 progresses along the glide path to Level C for PY2, CMS would determine that the ACO is experienced with performance-based risk in PY2 and the ACO would no longer be eligible to receive advance investment payments during PY2.

In the CY 2023 final rule (87 FR 69787), we stated that advance investment payments were intended to assist smaller, community-based providers in forming high-performing ACO networks by providing much-needed startup capital that can be used to attract and maintain staffing, purchase healthcare delivery infrastructure and IT systems, and develop and implement a strategy to address the health needs of underserved communities. It is for this reason we restricted AIP eligibility to those ACOs that are inexperienced with performance-based risk. ACOs that are experienced with performance-based risk generally would not need advance investment payments to successfully participate in the Shared Savings Program as they have previously participated in the Shared Savings Program or certain Innovation Center models or CMS programs in which the ACO accepted risk for shared losses. In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, we proposed to modify program regulations to permit an ACO to progress to two-sided risk along the BASIC track's glide path within the agreement period while the ACO continues to benefit from advance investment payments.

(2) Revisions

We proposed to modify AIP eligibility requirements to allow an ACO receiving advance investment payments to transition to two-sided risk within its 5-year agreement period under the BASIC track's glide path. Specifically, we proposed to modify § 425.630(b)(2) and (3) to allow an eligible ACO receiving advance investment payments to advance to performance-based risk (by advancing from Level A or B to Level C, D, or E of the BASIC track's glide path) beginning in PY3 of the ACO's agreement period. We also proposed to modify § 425.316(e)(2) to specify that CMS will cease payment of advance investment payments if CMS determines that an ACO approved for AIP became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives during the first or second performance year of its agreement period or became a high revenue ACO during any performance year of the agreement period in which it received advance investment payments. In accordance with § 425.316(e)(2)(ii), we may take compliance action against such ACOs. We also proposed to modify § 425.316(e)(2)(i) to specify that CMS will cease payment of advance investment payments no later than the quarter after the ACO became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or became a high revenue ACO.

Under the proposed approach, ACOs may choose to move into a two-sided risk participation option within the Shared Savings Program's BASIC track beginning in PY3 (and in subsequent performance years). These ACOs would still be required to repay advance investment payments through earned shared savings over the remaining performance years of their agreement period as prescribed in § 425.630(g). We proposed that this policy would be effective January 1, 2024. Under this proposal, an ACO could not use advance investment payments to fund repayment mechanisms or repay shared losses. This limitation also reduces the risk that ACOs stretch themselves beyond their financial capacity while receiving advance investment payments by taking on large amounts of risk. Unlike other ACOs, ACOs receiving advance investment payments will have the additional financial obligation of repaying the advance investment payments if they misjudge their appetite for risk and leave the program mid performance period after incurring shared losses. These policies are intended to align with our goal to support the creation of new ACOs that need time and resource assistance to develop the infrastructure to operate an ACO that effectively manages patient care and lowers costs.

After 2 years of participation, new ACOs may have sufficient experience to be capable of taking on downside risk available in levels C-E of the BASIC track. As proposed, these modifications balance the risk of a new ACO taking on too much risk too quickly while allowing them to take on moderate risk as they develop more experience with the program.

Specifically, we proposed to amend the eligibility criteria specified in § 425.630(b) as follows. We proposed to revise the eligibility criterion at § 425.630(b)(2) to remove language stating that the ACO has applied to participate in the Shared Savings Program “under any level of the BASIC track's glide path;” the revised provision would simply state that “CMS has determined that the ACO is eligible to participate in the Shared Savings Program.” Further, we proposed to amend the criterion in § 425.630(b)(3) to specify that the ACO must be inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives during its first 2 performance years but may participate in Levels of the BASIC track that would make it experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives starting with the third year of its first agreement period. Specifically, we proposed to specify in revisions to § 425.630(b)(3) that the ACO may participate in the Levels of the BASIC track's glide path as follows during the agreement period in which the ACO receives advance investment payments:

• For performance year 1, the ACO must participate in Level A of the BASIC track's glide path.

• For performance year 2, the ACO may participate in Level A of the BASIC track's glide path (in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 )) or Level B.

• For performance years 3 through 5, the ACO may participate in Level A of the BASIC track's glide path (in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 )), or Levels B through E.

To illustrate the proposed policy, consider an ACO entering an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, that applies for and is determined to be eligible to receive advance investment payments. The ACO must participate in Level A for PY1. In PY2, the ACO may remain under Level A for all subsequent years of the agreement period in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 ) or may move to Level B. The ACO would receive advance investment payments for PY1 and PY2, receiving the one-time payment of $250,000 and the 8 quarterly payments. If the ACO remained at Level A for PY2, it could then transition to a higher level of risk and potential reward within the glide path for PY3 (that is, Levels B, C, D, or E) in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 )( iii ). If the ACO participated in Level B for PY2, it could automatically progress for PY3 to Level C (in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 2 )) or elect to transition to Level D (in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 2 )( i ) and § 425.226(a)(2)(i)) or Level E (in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 2 )( i ) and § 425.226(a)(2)(i)) beginning with PY3.

Under this proposed modification, CMS will continue to recoup from future shared savings. In contrast to what is required under existing § 425.316(e)(3), the ACO will not be immediately obligated to repay all advance investment payments it received by virtue of its transition to a two-sided model in its third performance year or any subsequent performance year. We noted that under our proposal if an ACO opts to progress to a two-sided risk model (BASIC track's glide path Levels C through Level E) in PY2, CMS will terminate the ACO's advance investment payments, the ACO may be subject to compliance actions specified in §§ 425.216 and 425.218, and CMS may seek repayment of advance investment payments as set forth at § 425.316(e).

We solicited comments on our proposal to amend AIP policies and require that all ACOs receiving advance investment payments be inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives while the ACO receives advance investment payments—that is, during PY1 and PY2 of the agreement period—and to allow ACOs to progress to performance-based risk under the BASIC track's glide path beginning with PY3 of the same agreement period.

We received public comments on this proposal. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: Commenters largely supported CMS' proposal to allow ACOs receiving advance investment payments to progress along the glide path and move into a two-sided risk model beginning in PY 3 of the ACO's agreement period. Many commenters noted that this policy refinement will strengthen and enhance the Shared Savings Program and assist in meeting CMS' goal of having 100 percent of traditional Medicare beneficiaries in an accountable care relationship by 2030. Other commenters encouraged CMS to finalize this policy refinement, contending that advance investment payments will likely increase access to equitable care and reduce disparities in health outcomes in rural and underserved communities.

Response: We agree with commenters that this proposal will benefit the Shared Savings Program. Allowing ACOs receiving advance investment payments to move into a two-sided risk model beginning in PY 3 of their agreement period balances the risk of a new ACO taking on too much risk too quickly while allowing them to take on moderate risk as they develop more experience with the program, enabling ACOs receiving advance investment payments to progress along the BASIC track's glide path in a manner that works best for them. CMS expects this proposal will increase participation in the Shared Savings Program, especially among providers who practice in underserved communities, advance equitable access to quality care, and better health outcomes for ACOs' beneficiaries.

Comment: One commenter noted that allowing ACOs receiving advance investment payments to move into two-sided risk during the first agreement period provides greater flexibility for physician-led ACOs to participate in the Shared Savings Program. The commenter stated that this policy refinement will allow smaller practices to move into two-sided risk without the fear of having their advance investment payments immediately recouped.

Response: We agree with the commenter that this proposal will afford ACOs receiving advance investment payments the flexibility to move into a two-sided risk model later in their agreement period while continuing to use advance investment payments in the remaining performance years of their initial agreement period without fear of immediate recoupment by CMS, which will support all ACOs, including physician-led ACOs and smaller practices that are part of ACOs.

Comment: One commenter shared that because ACOs receiving advance investment payments are required to repay all advance investment payments received in the first 2 years of their agreement period in their entirety, CMS should make the AIP payment option as expansive as possible. Other commenters encouraged CMS to consider expanding AIP eligibility to all ACOs regardless of their experience with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives, whether they are a currently participating ACO or a renewing or re-entering ACO, or their status as a high revenue or low revenue ACO.

Response: We agree with the commenter that eligibility for advance investment payments should be expanded. This proposal supports that expansion and provides ACOs with increased flexibilities that should better support newly participating ACOs in their efforts to build and maintain a high-performing ACO. However, we disagree with commenters who suggest that all ACOs should be eligible for advance investment payments. As we stated in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69783 through 69785), expanding AIP eligibility to all ACOs or even all ACOs that can demonstrate need among their patient populations is not consistent with the purpose of AIP and would not be an appropriate use of the Trust Funds. AIP policy is based in part on the success of the ACO Investment Model, which primarily limited participation to ACOs who were (1) new to the Shared Savings Program; (2) did not include a hospital unless it was a critical access hospital or a small Inpatient Prospective Payment System (IPPS) hospital; and (3) were not owned or operated by a health plan. While these eligibility criteria do not exactly match the AIP eligibility criteria, the intent behind both sets of criteria is similar. In addition, advance investment payments are not intended to provide indefinite support to ACOs or to ACOs of all sizes, but to help provide start-up funding needed prior to earning shared savings for those ACOs that are most likely to face difficulty finding such funding.

As we previously explained, ACOs that are experienced with performance-based risk generally would not need advance investment payments to successfully participate in the Shared Savings Program as they have previously participated in the Shared Savings Program or certain Innovation Center models or CMS programs in which the ACO accepted risk for shared losses. Our experience administering the Shared Savings Program suggests that re-entering and renewing ACOs have alternative payment model experience and would not need, or benefit as significantly from, the start-up funds that advance investment payments provide because they have already invested in creating an ACO (see 87 FR 69784). They may also be able to leverage their experience to raise the necessary funds more easily than entities that are new and may primarily consist of ACO participants that are inexperienced with performance-based risk. Similarly, existing ACOs participating and earning shared savings have access to more resources to serve their aligned beneficiaries, and many existing ACOs already have health IT infrastructure in place to support and coordinate high quality care (87 FR 69786).

Advance investment payments are intended to advance shared savings to provide start-up funding for ACOs that are less well capitalized than a high revenue ACO, which should not need advance funding from CMS to increase staffing, improve healthcare infrastructure, and provide accountable care for underserved beneficiaries (87 FR 69786). By contrast, low revenue ACOs tend to be small, physician-led ACOs that are less well-capitalized organizations, and these ACOs may be encouraged to participate and remain in the program based on the availability of additional incentives, such as the opportunity to receive advance investment payments. For these reasons and the reasons stated elsewhere in this section, and to safeguard the Medicare Trust Funds, CMS will maintain more limited eligibility criteria at this time.

Comment: Other commenters requested that CMS further modify AIP eligibility requirements to include ACOs who have been designated as experienced with performance-based risk by participating in the ENHANCED track. The commenters noted that these ACOs may still lack the significant resources and infrastructure required to meaningfully address patients' health and social needs.

Response: We disagree with commenters that it would be appropriate to provide advance investment payments to an ACO that has been designated as experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives for the reasons stated previously in this section. We also disagree with commenters that it would be appropriate to provide advance investment payments to an ACO that is participating in the ENHANCED track. As we stated in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69786), ACOs in the BASIC track are typically less experienced with risk and are more likely to benefit from upfront funding or ongoing financial assistance, while ACOs in the ENHANCED track, given the level of risk involved in that track, are generally well established and confident in their ability to coordinate care for their beneficiary population. However, as described in section III.G.5.c of this final rule, in the event than an ACO voluntarily terminates its participation agreement at the end of PY2 or later during the agreement period in which it received advance investment payments, and the ACO immediately enters into a new participation agreement with CMS under any level of the BASIC track's glide path or the ENHANCED track, CMS will not seek to collect all advance investment payments received from an ACO in accordance with § 425.630(g)(4). CMS will carry forward any remaining balance of advance investment payments owed by the early renewing ACO into the ACO's new agreement period.

These ACOs also benefit from effective management and planning, and such ACOs would not need advance investment payments from CMS to increase staffing, improve healthcare infrastructure, and provide accountable care for underserved beneficiaries. We also note that we solicited comments as part of the RFI in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule regarding how ACOs could better work with CBOs to address the unmet health and social needs of beneficiaries, and we will take the comments we received in response to that solicitation into consideration for future rulemaking. See section III.G.8.e of this final rule.

Comment: One commenter stated that all ACOs would benefit from AIP and would use the funds to invest in technology enhancements and account for resource expenditures resulting from the difficulty of keeping up with Shared Savings Program rules and guidance.

Response: We disagree with commenters who suggest that all ACOs should be eligible for advance investment payments for the reasons stated elsewhere in this section of this final rule. We also note that CMS furnishes annual program guidance based upon annual CMS rulemaking and updates those guidance materials with important and necessary program information for each upcoming performance year. These materials are available to all ACOs. CMS guidance materials include proposed and final rule fact sheets, detailed explanations of program requirements and financial calculations, and a number of other materials found in the Application toolkit and the ACO Management System (ACO-MS) knowledge library. ACOs may also submit inquiries to the Shared Savings Program helpdesk. We also note that investments in new technologies, including those required to meet program standards, are generally necessary among all healthcare providers, including those not participating in the Shared Savings Program, to keep pace with the current standards of medicine and deliver high-quality, coordinated care to patients.

Comment: Other commenters suggested that CMS consider expanding AIP eligibility to existing ACOs that meet specific parameters. Specifically, commenters requested that CMS consider exceptions that would allow FQHCs, RHCs, and critical access hospitals (CAHs) to be eligible for AIP, even if they do not meet the current eligibility requirements regarding revenue and risk experience. Other commenters noted that the current eligibility criteria are overly limiting and exclude many safety net providers as a result. The commenters noted that these provider types still lack the significant resources and infrastructure required to meaningfully address patients' health-related and social needs, even if they are deemed high-revenue by CMS.

Response: We agree with commenters that FQHCs, RHCs, CAHs, and other safety net providers play an important role in addressing the healthcare and social needs of underserved communities. However, we disagree that revising the AIP eligibility criteria is necessary for FQHCs, RHCs, and CAHs to receive advance investment payments. AIP eligibility requirements are set forth at § 425.630(b). Section 425.630(b)(2) currently provides that an ACO must have applied to participate in the Shared Savings Program under any level of the BASIC track's glide path and be eligible to participate in the Shared Savings Program to be eligible to receive advance investment payments. Section 425.102(a) states that CAHs that bill under Method II (as described in § 413.70(b)(3)), FQHCs, and RHCs are eligible to apply to participate in the Shared Savings Program. We remind commenters the Shared Savings Program currently includes these provider types among the 456 ACOs participating in CY 2023 (2023 Shared Savings Program Fast Facts: https://www.cms.gov/files/document/2023-shared-savings-program-fast-facts.pdf ).

Moreover, as we explained in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69786), we disagree that the AIP eligibility criteria should include an exception for high revenue ACOs that include safety-net providers, such as CAHs, FQHCs, and RHCs, as ACO participants. This would result in many ACOs receiving advance investment payments that do not need access to start-up capital. The vast majority of FQHCs and RHCs participating in Shared Savings Program ACOs without a hospital are in low revenue ACOs, so the AIP eligibility criteria should not preclude them from receiving advance investment payments. We plan to monitor the impact of advance investment payments on ACO formation and program participation, including the impact on CAHs.

For the reasons explained in the previous discussion in this section of this final, we disagree with the commenters who suggested that CMS should revise the eligibility criteria to permit renewing or re-entering ACOs, currently participating ACOs, and ACOs that are experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives to receive advance investment payments.

Comment: Multiple commenters recommended that CMS allow new, high revenue ACOs to be eligible for AIP regardless of their geographic location or status as a safety net provider, contending that this approach is aligned with CMS' goal to increase participation in the program through AIP. A few commenters stated that the distinction between high and low revenue is “artificial.” Another commenter cited analysis that found there was no significant difference in high revenue and low revenue ACO performance. One commenter shared that current AIP eligibility requirements exclude Medicare beneficiaries who may experience negative health outcomes due to socioeconomic factors simply because they are attributed to a high revenue ACO. These commenters urged CMS to remove the requirement that an ACO be considered low revenue to be eligible for advance investment payments.

Response: We disagree with commenters about whether revenue status is an appropriate criterion to consider in determining AIP eligibility. As we explained previously in this section of this final rule, the intent of AIP is to advance shared savings to provide start-up funding for ACOs that are less well capitalized than a high revenue ACO. Low revenue ACOs tend to be small, physician-led ACOs that are less well capitalized than a high revenue ACO, and low revenue ACOs may be encouraged to participate and remain in the program based on the availability of additional incentives, such as the opportunity to receive advance investment payments.

In contrast to low revenue ACOs, high revenue ACOs should not need advance funding from CMS to increase staffing, improve healthcare infrastructure, and provide accountable care for underserved beneficiaries, including Medicare beneficiaries who may experience negative health outcomes due to socioeconomic factors, because they are more likely to be sophisticated organizations with access to additional funding through parent organizations or capital markets and are more likely to already have the resources needed to provide accountable care for underserved beneficiaries. In addition to having access to more capital, ACOs identified as high revenue have a higher degree of control over the healthcare of their assigned beneficiaries. Relative to low revenue ACOs, high revenue ACOs provide a larger proportion of the healthcare their beneficiaries receive. This is because the services high revenue ACOs provide to their beneficiaries account for a larger amount of their assigned beneficiaries' total Medicare Parts A and B FFS expenditures (See § 425.20, “High revenue ACO” and “Low revenue ACO”). They should therefore be in a better position to coordinate care for their beneficiaries. For further discussion of revenue status and other AIP eligibility criteria, we refer readers to our previous discussion in this section of this final rule and the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69784 through 69786).

We also note that ACOs that meet the criteria set forth in § 425.630(b) are eligible to receive advance investment payments, regardless of their geographic location or status as a safety net provider. Separately, as we stated in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69803), we will continue to monitor and collect program data on advance investment payments and the AIP eligibility requirements. After data on how advance investment payments impact ACOs and their beneficiaries, including underserved beneficiaries, become available, CMS may revisit the AIP eligibility criteria in future rulemaking.

Comment: Some commenters noted that one barrier to increasing ACO participation in underserved communities is not including consideration of the level of need represented by their patient population in the AIP eligibility determination. Several commenters recommended CMS consider other eligibility criteria which are more reflective of an ACO's level of capital and inclusive of the patient populations they serve. These commenters suggested that CMS consider the proportion of an ACO's assigned beneficiaries who meet the highest risk factors-based score when determining AIP eligibility (that is, those beneficiaries who are enrolled in the Medicare Part D LIS or are dually eligibility for Medicare and Medicaid, or whose mailing addresses are matched to ADIs at or above the 85th percentile).

Response: We disagree with the comment that beneficiary need is not considered when we determine an ACO's eligibility for advance investment payments. As we explained in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (69785), re-entering and renewing ACOs are ineligible to receive advance investment payments partly because our experience administering the Shared Savings Program has shown us that these ACOs have already benefited from alternative payment model experience, and therefore, would be less likely to need financial support to develop programs targeting SDOH or to become operational. Similarly, as we explained previously in this section of this final rule, high revenue ACOs are ineligible to receive advance investment payments partly because, unlike low revenue ACOs, they are substantially better positioned to provide accountable care for underserved beneficiaries.

Comment: One commenter urged CMS to consider extending AIP eligibility to renewing or re-entering ACOs who have never achieved shared savings due to not having access to this type of up-front investment. Another commenter urged CMS to consider offering AIP opportunities for renewing, low revenue ACOs that require additional investment to sustain participation in the Shared Savings Program. The commenter noted this would be especially helpful for ACOs that have yet to earn shared savings and are caring for underserved populations.

Response: We remind commenters that advance investment payments are not intended to provide indefinite support to ACOs or to ACOs of all sizes, but to help provide start-up funding needed prior to earning shared savings for those ACOs that face difficulty finding such funding. Expanding AIP eligibility to all ACOs, including those that can demonstrate need among their beneficiary population, is not an appropriate use of the Medicare Trust Funds. For those reasons and the reasons explained previously in this section of this final rule, we disagree with the commenters who suggest we consider expanding AIP eligibility to certain renewing or re-entering ACOs.

For the reasons discussed above, we are finalizing the revisions we proposed at § 425.630(b) clarifying the AIP eligibility requirements and allowing the progression to performance-based risk for ACOs that receive advance investment payments beginning with PY 3 of the agreement period in which they received an advance investment payment. Under this finalized modification, CMS will continue to recoup from future shared savings. In contrast to what is required under existing § 425.316(e)(3), the ACO would not be immediately obligated to repay all advance investment payments it received by virtue of its transition to a two-sided model in its third performance year or any subsequent performance year. We note that under our proposal if an ACO opts to progress to a two-sided risk model (BASIC track's glide path Levels C through Level E) in PY2, CMS would terminate the ACO's advance investment payments, the ACO may be subject to compliance actions specified in §§ 425.216 and 425.218, and CMS may seek repayment of advance investment payments as set forth at § 425.316(e).

c. Modifications to AIP Recoupment and Recovery Policies for Early Renewing ACOs

(1) Background

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69803 through 69805), CMS finalized program policies regarding recoupment and recovery of advance investment payments. In accordance with § 425.630(g)(4), if an ACO terminates its participation agreement during the agreement period in which it received an advance investment payment, the ACO must repay all advance investment payments it received. CMS would provide written notification to the ACO of the amount due and the ACO must pay such amount no later than 90 days after the receipt of such notification.

Paragraph (2) of the definition of “renewing ACO” at § 425.20 includes an ACO that continues its participation in the Shared Savings Program for a consecutive agreement period, without a break in participation, because it is an ACO that terminated its current participation agreement under § 425.220 and immediately enters a new agreement period to continue its participation in the program. In prior rulemaking (see, for example, 83 FR 67885 through 67890), we have referred to this provision as allowing for an “early renewal” option. In developing the AIP policies in the PFS rulemaking for CY 2023, we did not address the potential interactions between the policy on recovery of advance investment payments specified in § 425.630(g) and a voluntary termination of the participation agreement by an ACO that is seeking to early renew.

(2) Revisions

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52485), we proposed to amend § 425.630(g)(4) to create a limited exception to CMS's policy of recovering advance investment payments from an ACO that voluntarily terminates its participation agreement for the agreement period during which it received advance investment payments. Under this proposal, we would not seek to collect all advance investment payments received from an ACO in accordance with § 425.630(g)(4) if the ACO voluntarily terminates its participation agreement at the end of PY2 or later during the agreement period in which it received advance investment payments, provided that the ACO immediately enters into a new participation agreement with CMS under any level of the BASIC track's glide path or the ENHANCED track. Rather, we would carry forward any remaining balance of advance investment payments owed by the early renewing ACO into the ACO's new agreement period. ACOs who participate in the Shared Savings Program participate in either the Basic or Enhanced track for their entire agreement period. While all ACOs receiving advance investment payments must participate in the Basic track for their first agreement period, they have flexibility to begin a new agreement period and participate in either track while CMS recoups the payments from earned shared savings.

We proposed to allow an ACO approved for AIP to early renew its participation agreement before the expiration of its current agreement, as long as the ACO terminates its current participation agreement effective on or after December 31 of the ACO's second performance year. By requiring the ACO to maintain its current agreement period for the first 2 years, the ACO will receive all of its advance investment payments prior to renewing its participation agreement. We further proposed that in such circumstances, the early renewing ACO must continue to repay the advance investment payments through shared savings earned in the subsequent agreement period. If an ACO early renews prior to PY3, it will no longer comply with the eligibility requirements for receiving payments in § 425.630(b)(1) and may be subject to compliance actions under §§ 425.216 and 425.218.

Section 425.630(e)(3) specifies that an ACO may spend advance investment payments over its entire agreement period and must repay to CMS any unspent funds remaining at the end of the ACO's agreement period. We proposed to amend § 425.630(e)(3) to permit an early renewing ACO to spend advance investment payments in its second agreement period so long as the advance investment payments are spent within 5 performance years of when it began to receive advance investment payments (that is, PY1 of its first agreement period). If the ACO does not spend all of the advance investment payments received by the end of the fifth performance year, the ACO must repay any unspent funds to CMS. The duration of spending advance investment payments was discussed in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69801).

As we stated in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52485), we anticipate these policy proposals would be most relevant to an ACO that is receiving advance investment payments and seeks to early renew to enter a new participation agreement to participate under modified Shared Savings Program policies that are not applicable to the ACO's current agreement period. For such an ACO, any remaining balance of advance investment payments owed would continue to be recouped from any shared savings the ACO earns in its new agreement period. Further, such an ACO would continue its participation in the Shared Savings Program without a lapse in participation and would be required to continue to adhere to all AIP requirements. Continued program participation aligns with our goals to improve the quality and efficiency of care. These policies provide ACOs the flexibility to participate in the Shared Savings Program in a manner that may work best for their structure and patient population without having to choose between immediately paying back the advance investment payments they received and being able to enter a new agreement with the Shared Savings Program. Some policy changes are applicable only to new agreement periods, and ACOs approved for AIP should have the opportunity to enter a new agreement to experience those changes. We are finalizing this proposal without modification, and it will be effective January 1, 2024.

We solicited comments on the proposed changes to § 425.630(e)(3) and (g)(4).

We received public comments on this proposal. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: Several commenters were supportive of CMS' proposal to provide these additional flexibilities to ACOs that receive advance investment payments and wish to early renew their participation in the Shared Savings Program. One commenter shared that they appreciate CMS' proposal to allow ACOs receiving advance investment payments to early renew and not require immediate repayment of all advance investment payments received. The commenter contended that allowing ACOs to repay advance investment payments in the ACO's new agreement period allows the ACO to participate in the Shared Savings Program in the manner that works best for their structure and patient population. The commenter also supported CMS' proposal to allow an early renewing ACO that received advance investment payments to continue to spend advance investment payments in its second agreement period, provided that the funds are spent within 5 performance years of when it began to receive advance investment payments. One commenter noted that this policy refinement could ensure continued Shared Savings Program participation by ACOs in their initial agreement periods.

Response: We agree with commenters that allowing flexibility for early renewing ACOs that received advance investment payments in the agreement period they are terminating will provide incentives for continued participation in the Shared Savings Program. Allowing ACOs to carry advance investment payments over into a new agreement period will provide flexibility to these ACOs that they can use to maximize their shared savings potential and participate in the Shared Savings Program in a manner that may work best for their structure and patient population without having to choose between immediately paying back the advance investment payments they received and being able to enter a new agreement period.

Comment: Several commenters were supportive of CMS's proposals to allow ACOs that receive advance investment payments to early renew but made recommendations to CMS on refining our AIP recoupment policies. These commenters urged CMS to consider modifications to AIP recoupment and recovery policies, which currently dictate that CMS will recoup advance investment payments from all earned shared savings by an ACO until all advance investment payments are repaid. Several commenters urged CMS to consider a longer time period for recoupment of advance investment payments. One commenter noted that if an ACO that received advance investment payments was unable to achieve shared savings payments for a significant period, this existing policy may jeopardize the ACO's ability to maintain its infrastructure and investments to support care coordination and performance improvement efforts. This commenter recommended a more gradual repayment that allows the ACO to retain a portion of earned shared savings during the performance year, noting that ACOs often reinvest earned shared savings to improve care quality and efficiency of care delivery.

Response: As we explained in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69804 through 69805), AIP recoupment begins the first performance year of the agreement period in which the ACO achieves shared savings, and any advance investment payments that are not recouped in the first agreement period would continue into the ACO's next agreement period and subsequent agreement periods if an AIP balance persists. We disagree with commenters that a longer recoupment period would be appropriate. As we explained in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we view our AIP recoupment policy as a critical measure necessary to ensure the adequate protection of the Medicare Trust Funds regardless of the characteristics of the ACO's provider composition, aligned beneficiary population, and financial or quality performance. Immediately recouping these funds from earned shared savings should not disadvantage any ACOs as they will be receiving quarterly payments for the first 2 years. Regarding the commenters who advocated that ACOs should be able to retain a portion of their advance investment payments, we note that the advance investment payments are not intended to supplement FFS payments, but rather provide start-up capital out of expected future shared savings to be used by new ACOs to provide sufficient resources for staffing, providing accountable care for underserved beneficiaries, and investing in healthcare delivery infrastructure.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing our proposed changes to AIP recoupment and recovery policies for early renewing ACOs. We are finalizing our proposed revisions to § 425.630(e)(3), with modifications for improved clarity. We are finalizing without modification our proposed revisions to § 425.630(g)(4).

In summary, we anticipate these finalized policy changes would be most relevant to an ACO that is receiving advance investment payments and seeks to early renew to enter a new participation agreement to participate under modified Shared Savings Program policies that are not applicable to the ACO's current agreement period. For such an ACO, any remaining balance of advance investment payments owed would continue to be recouped from any shared savings the ACO earns in its new agreement period. Further, such an ACO would continue its participation in the Shared Savings Program without a lapse in participation and would be required to continue to adhere to all AIP requirements. These finalized policies will be effective January 1, 2024.

d. Amendments to Termination Policies To Allow CMS To Cease Distribution of Advance Investment Payments Following an ACO's Notification of Voluntary Termination

(1) Background

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69803), we finalized policies for termination of advance investment payments at § 425.630(h). Section 425.630(h)(1) specifies that CMS may terminate an ACO's advance investment payments if the ACO fails to comply with the requirements of § 425.630 or meets any of the grounds for ACO termination set forth in § 425.218(b). However, we did not address the termination of advance investment payments if an ACO voluntarily terminates its participation agreement in accordance with § 425.220(a). This created ambiguity regarding whether CMS would continue to make quarterly advance investment payments to an ACO that voluntarily terminates its participation agreement in accordance with § 425.220(a) and does not immediately enter a new agreement period. We are concerned that the continued payment of advance investment payments in such a case would not serve the purpose for which CMS is making such payments and would create unnecessary program integrity risks for the Shared Savings Program. In such a case, CMS would be knowingly paying funds to the ACO that will need to be repaid upon termination.

(2) Revisions

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52485), we proposed to permit CMS to terminate advance investment payments for future quarters to an ACO that has provided CMS with notice of termination in accordance with § 425.220(a) if the ACO will not immediately enter a new agreement period. This avoids distributing advance investment payments to an ACO from which CMS would subsequently need to recover such payments. Specifically, we proposed to add § 425.630(h)(1)(iii), which allows CMS to terminate an ACO's advance investment payments when the ACO voluntarily terminates its participation agreement in accordance with § 425.220(a). We also proposed conforming changes to the punctuation of the list of factors in paragraphs (h)(1)(i) and (ii) of § 425.630. These proposed changes would be effective January 1, 2024.

We solicited comments on this proposal. We received public comments on this proposal. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: Several commenters expressed appreciation of CMS' proposed policy revisions to terminate advance investment payments made to an ACO in the case of voluntary termination. Commenters noted that this revision aligns with the policy for ceasing advance investment payments for other causes of termination and protects the Medicare Trust Funds. One commenter suggested that CMS consider the reasons for termination and investments made by the ACO when requiring terminated ACOs to pay back all advance investment payments received.

Response: We agree with commenters that ceasing advance investment payments to ACOs that inform CMS of their intent to terminate their participation agreement is necessary to safeguard the Medicare Trust Funds. We disagree with the commenter who suggested that CMS consider the reasons for the ACO's termination before requiring the repayment of all advance investment payments received. As we stated previously in this section of this final rule, recoupment of advance investment payments is a critical measure necessary to ensure the adequate protection of the Medicare Trust Funds regardless of the characteristics of the ACO's provider composition, aligned beneficiary population, and financial or quality performance. By requiring immediate repayment of advance investment payments upon early termination, we also reduce the risk that ACOs will voluntarily terminate their participation agreements to avoid repayment of advance investment payments.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing this proposal without modification. Beginning January 1, 2024, CMS will cease paying advance investment quarterly payments to any ACO that voluntarily terminates its participation agreement in accordance with § 425.220(a) if the ACO will not immediately enter a new agreement period. This policy revision is consistent with § 425.630(g)(4), which requires such an ACO to repay all advance investment payments within the 90 days after receiving notice of the amount due to CMS.

e. Requirements for ACOs To Report to CMS Spend Plan Updates and Use of Advance Investment Payments

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69786 through 69788), CMS finalized program policies to require ACOs that receive advance investment payments to submit a spend plan to CMS as a part of their Shared Savings Program application (§ 425.630(d)(1)). In accordance with § 425.630(d)(3), CMS may review an ACO's spend plan at any time and require the ACO to modify its spend plan to comply with the spend plan requirements specified at § 425.630(d)(2) and the requirements for use and management of advance investment payments at § 425.630(e).

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69801 and 69802), we also finalized requirements at § 425.308(b)(8) that an ACO receiving advance investment payments must publicly report information, updated annually, about the ACO's use of advance investment payments for each performance year, including the following:

• The ACO's spend plan.

• The total amount of any advance investment payments received from CMS.

• An itemization of how advance investment payments were spent during the year, including expenditure categories, the dollar amounts spent on the various categories, any changes to the spend plan submitted under § 425.630(d), and such other information as may be specified by CMS.

These provisions do not require an ACO to submit this same information to CMS. To support CMS's ability to monitor AIP efficiently, in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52486), we proposed that an ACO must report to CMS the same information about its use of advance investment payments that it is required to publicly report under § 425.308(b)(8).

To ensure that § 425.630 sets forth the complete requirements applicable to an ACO's obligation to report information on its receipt and use of advance investment payments, we proposed to add a new provision at § 425.630(i) specifying that an ACO must (1) publicly report information about the ACO's use of advance investment payments for each performance year in accordance with § 425.308(b)(8); and (2) in a form and manner and by a deadline specified by CMS, report to CMS the same information it is required to publicly report in accordance with § 425.308(b)(8).

We expect that these proposed changes would help ensure that CMS efficiently obtains information in a consistent manner from all ACOs receiving advance investment payments and thereby support CMS's monitoring and analysis of the use of advance investment payments. We anticipate that these proposed changes will impose little to no administrative burden on participating ACOs, which are already required to publicly report this information by § 425.308(b)(8). Further, we expect to use the submitted data as the template that ACOs can use to populate their public reporting web page early in each performance year to minimize administrative burden for ACOs. These proposed changes would be effective January 1, 2024.

We solicited comments on this proposal. We received public comments on this proposal. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: Several commenters supported CMS' proposal to require ACOs receiving advance investment payments to report the same information to CMS as is reported publicly on the ACOs public reporting website page. Another commenter noted that AIP reporting will require additional steps for the ACOs who have elected to receive advance investment payments. The commenter cautioned CMS to consider ways to reduce any extra reporting steps and instead allow for increased flexibility for reporting on advance investment payments and AIP spend plans.

Response: We agree with commenters that the information ACOs publicly report about their use of advance investment payments must be consistent with the information the ACOs provide to CMS. This proposal ensures that CMS receives the same information ACOs publicly account for advance investment payments received and their actual advance investment payment spending by category (that is, increased staffing, healthcare infrastructure and provisions of accountable care by underserved beneficiaries) and thereby supports CMS's monitoring of ACOs' use of advance investment payments. While CMS is mindful of reporting burden, this proposal supports our program integrity and monitoring efforts, and the administrative burden on participating ACOs should be minimal because they are already required to publicly report this information by § 425.308(b)(8). We remind the commenters that we expect to use the submitted data as the template that ACOs can use to populate their public reporting web page early in each performance year to minimize administrative burden on ACOs. In the future, CMS will consider ways to further ease the reporting burden on ACOs receiving advance investment payments.

Comment: One commenter shared that AIP could be leveraged by ACOs to enhance sociodemographic data collection, create targeted initiatives to reduce health disparities, and develop relationships with community-based organizations (CBOs) to address social needs. In short, the commenter suggested that advance investment payments could accelerate the investments and infrastructure for existing ACOs to build health equity programs, including data collection on the social determinants of health of beneficiaries.

Response: We agree with the commenter that AIP could provide an opportunity to collect sociodemographic data on beneficiaries in the Shared Savings Program if necessary to implement initiatives focused on increased staffing, health care infrastructure, and the provision of accountable care for underserved beneficiaries, which may include addressing social determinants of health as required in § 425.630(e)(1). We note that advance investment payments must be used consistent with all applicable laws and regulations, including applicable anti-discrimination laws. We also agree with the commenter that advance investment payments could assist in providing coordinated care to underserved populations, and we agree that advance investment payments could be valuable in enabling clinical practices to partner with CBOs when identifying and providing care to underserved beneficiaries, which we note may include those who are impacted by SDOH factors that contribute to poor health outcomes. In the future, after advance investment payments are implemented in PY 2024, we will monitor how advance investment payments impact ACOs and their beneficiaries, including how ACOs use the funds. We intend to expand access to accountable care in underserved communities and will continue to refine and improve the Shared Savings Program to encourage ACO participation.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing as proposed the addition of a new provision at § 425.630(i). This finalized change will help ensure that CMS efficiently obtains information in a consistent manner from all ACOs receiving advance investment payments and thereby support CMS's monitoring and analysis of the use of advance investment payments.

f. Permitting Reconsideration Review of Quarterly Payment Calculations

(1) Background

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69795 and 69796), we specified that an ACO can request a reconsideration review if CMS does not make an advance investment payment to the ACO under subpart I of part 425 (§ 425.630(f)). However, we did not specify that an ACO could request reconsideration of the amount of the advance investment payments.

(2) Revisions

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52487), we proposed to permit an ACO to request a reconsideration review for all AIP quarterly payment calculations, not just instances where no payments are distributed. We proposed to revise § 425.630(f) to provide that CMS would notify in writing each ACO of its determination of the amount of the advance investment payments it will receive and that such notice would inform the ACO of its right to request reconsideration review in accordance with the procedures specified under 42 CFR part 425, subpart I. We solicited comments on this proposal.

We received several public comments on this proposal. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our response.

Comment: All commenters supported CMS' proposed policy refinement. Commenters also suggested that CMS provide payment details far enough in advance to allow sufficient time to resolve reconsideration reviews and avoid delayed payments to ACOs.

Response: We appreciate the commenter's support of our proposed policy. CMS intends to provide payment details as quickly as operationally possible to avoid delays in payment of advance investment payments.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing as proposed the revision of § 425.630(f) without modification.

6. Shared Savings Program Eligibility Requirements

a. Overview

We proposed two modifications to the Shared Savings Program eligibility requirements that will be implemented on January 1, 2024. Specifically, we proposed the following, which are discussed in more detail in sections (b) and (c) below:

• Remove the option for ACOs to request an exception to the shared governance requirement that 75 percent control of an ACO's governing body must be held by ACO participants.

• Codify the existing Shared Savings Program operational approach to specify that CMS determines that an ACO participant TIN participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if it was or will be included on a participant list used in financial reconciliation for a performance year under performance-based risk during the 5 most recent performance years.

b. Shared Governance Requirement

(1) Background

In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67819), we finalized policies that require an ACO to establish and maintain a governing body with adequate authority to execute the statutory functions of an ACO, and we codified the governing body policies at § 425.106. Specifically, § 425.106(c)(3) mandates that at least 75 percent control of an ACO's governing body must be held by ACO participants. An ACO's governing body is responsible for providing ACO leadership, strategic direction, and oversight for operational management towards meeting the goals of the ACO, including better care, healthy communities, and reduced spending. This responsibility incorporates not only the delivery of improved healthcare, but also the promotion of evidence-based healthcare practices, improved engagement of patients and caregivers, reporting on quality and cost, provision of high-quality care to beneficiaries, and the distribution of shared savings, among other functions. In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67819), we indicated our belief that this requirement allowed for Medicare-enrolled entities that directly provide health care services to beneficiaries to drive decision-making, while recognizing that partnerships with non-Medicare enrolled entities outside this 75 percent composition allow these participants access to capital and infrastructure needed for an ACO. This physician-driven leadership is balanced by the remaining percentage of the governing body that is made up of patient advocates, accounting, legal and other professionals that support administrative duties and other functions of the ACO.

We affirmed in the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67820) our belief that the 75 percent participant control requirement is necessary to ensure that ACOs are provider-driven, innovative in care delivery and strike an appropriate balance to incentivize and empower ACO participants to be accountable for the success of the ACO's operations and improve the health outcomes of their beneficiaries. Previously, commenters expressed concern that the 75 percent participant control threshold is overly prescriptive and may hinder operations, conflict with IRS and State tax laws, and restrict access to capital for the ACO. ACOs requested flexibility to develop their own governing body composition to meet the unique leadership needs of the ACO. In response to these comments, CMS granted an exception process for an ACO that wishes to structure its governing body in a manner that does not meet the 75 percent participant control threshold as required under § 425.106(c)(3). Under the exception process defined at paragraph (c)(5), an ACO must describe why it seeks to differ from the 75 percent participant control threshold and how the ACO will involve ACO participants in innovative ways in ACO governance. If the exception is granted by CMS, an ACO can form a governing body with less than 75 percent participant control.

In the December 2014 Medicare Shared Savings Program proposed rule (79 FR 72776) we proposed to revise § 425.106(c)(5) to remove the flexibility for ACOs to deviate from the requirement that at least 75 percent control of an ACO's governing body must be held by ACO participants. We stated that, through program implementation, we learned that ACO applicants do not have difficulty meeting the requirements under § 425.106(c)(3) that ACO participants maintain 75 percent control of the governing body. We also noted that since CY 2012, we had not denied participation to any ACO applicants solely based on failure to comply with this requirement and no exceptions have been granted by CMS under § 425.106(c)(5). Furthermore, we affirmed the 75 percent participant control requirement to be “necessary and protective of the ACO participant's interests” and thus, that there was no reason to continue to offer an exception to the rule.

During the public comment period for the December 2014 Medicare Shared Savings Program proposed rule, several commenters advocated for retaining the flexibility offered at § 425.106(c)(5), stating that an ACO may elect to utilize the exception in the future. In our response, we noted that our program experience thus far had not suggested that commenters' concerns that laws concerning the composition of tax-exempt or State-licensed entities would interfere with their ability to meet the 75 percent participant control threshold would impact their compliance with this requirement. However, since implementation of the requirement remained in the early stages and we had limited applicability with ACOs in two-sided risk tracks, we declined to finalize the proposal in the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32719) and elected to retain the flexibility at § 425.106(c)(5). In the final rule, we noted that we anticipated granting such exceptions only in limited circumstances (that is, an ACO being unable to meet the 75 percent participant control requirement because it conflicts with other laws) and might revisit this issue in future rulemaking.

(2) Revisions

We continue to believe that ACO participants should drive ACO leadership to move toward improved quality of care and patient outcomes, and that this is a key component of ACO success and ability to earn shared savings. The 75 percent participant control threshold is critical to ensuring that governing bodies are participant-led and best positioned to meet program goals, while allowing for partnership with non-Medicare enrolled entities to provide needed capital and infrastructure for ACO formation and administration.

Over the years, a few ACOs have requested an exception to form a governing body with less than 75 percent participant control. CMS discussed the exemption requests with the interested ACOs and ultimately most ACOs adjusted to comply with the 75 percent participant control requirement. As noted in the proposed rule, we believed that no ACO had been granted an ACO an exception to this requirement, despite the flexibility provided in current regulation. Accordingly, we believed that there was no reason to continue to offer an exception to the requirement. Thus, we proposed to remove the option under § 425.106(c)(5) for ACOs to request an exception to the requirement specified in § 425.106(c)(3) that 75 percent control of the ACO's governing body must be held by ACO participants. Additionally, we proposed a corresponding revision to § 425.204(c)(3) to remove the option for ACOs to request an exception to the 75 percent control requirement under § 425.106(c)(3) as part of their Shared Savings Program applications.

We solicited comments on the appropriateness of our proposed policy refinement and elimination of the exception process. As stated in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, the proposed modification to § 425.106(c) would make no changes to paragraphs(c)(2), (3) and (4). We also proposed to amend § 425.106(c)(5) to remove reference to paragraph (c)(3) and the procedure for submitting a request for an exception to the 75 percent requirement. Specifically, in our proposal the revised regulation text would state that in cases in which the composition of the ACO's governing body does not meet the requirements of paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the ACO must describe why it seeks to differ from these requirements and how the ACO will provide meaningful representation in ACO governance by Medicare beneficiaries. Additionally, we proposed to amend § 425.204(c)(3) to remove references to § 425.106(c)(3) and the procedure for submitting a request for an exception to the 75 percent requirement. We proposed that these amendments would become effective on January 1, 2024.

We received public comments on these proposals. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: Commenters largely supported our proposal to remove the option for ACOs to request an exception to the requirement specified in § 425.106(c)(3) that 75 percent control of the ACO's governing body must be held by ACO participants. Commenters noted they believe the threshold was appropriate, attainable, and important to ACO care delivery. Other commenters also noted that they believe that it is important to ACO participant involvement and supported centering practitioners in ACO governance.

Response: We agree with the majority of commenters who stated that it was appropriate to remove the exception to meeting the requirement that 75 percent control of the ACO's governing body must be held by ACO participants. We agree with commenters about the importance of ACO participant governance and that it is attainable. We believe that this requirement is necessary and protective of the ACO participants' interests and does not believe that it is necessary to grant exceptions to this requirement.

Comment: One commenter did not support removing the exception and wanted ACOs to retain the ability to make this request. Another commenter contested the statement that CMS has never issued an exception to the 75 percent control threshold, as they had worked with ACOs who believe they have received such an exception.

Response: We disagree with the commenter who wants to retain the exception for the meeting the 75 percent participant control threshold as we do not believe it is necessary for ACO participation as noted above. However, in response to the comment regarding previously issued exceptions, we reviewed all previous application data and discovered 3 ACOs operating with an exception to the 75 percent threshold and 2 that had an exception at the start of their agreement period but are currently meeting the threshold. While CMS failed to identify these ACOs in the proposed rule and the assertion that approvals had never occurred was cited by several supporting comments, these previously issued exceptions do not change our belief that exceptions to this requirement should no longer be permitted. To reduce disruption for the few ACOs who do not currently meet the requirement, we are finalizing this policy with the modification that the exception will be permitted only for agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024.

After consideration of the public comments, we are finalizing our proposal with modification, to specify that the option under § 425.106(c)(5) for ACOs to request an exception to the requirement specified in § 425.106(c)(3) that 75 percent control of the ACO's governing body must be held by ACO participants is applicable only to agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024.

Additionally, we are finalizing with modification the proposed changes to § 425.204(c)(3). We are finalizing revisions to § 425.204(c)(3)(iii) to limit the option for ACOs to request an exception to the 75 percent control requirement under § 425.106(c)(3), as part of their Shared Savings Program applications, to agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024. Further, we are finalizing a technical change to § 425.204(c)(3)(ii), to provide a more complete cross-reference to § 425.106(c)(2), for clarity and consistency.

c. Identifying ACOs Experienced With Risk Based on TINs' Prior Participation

(1) Background

In the December 2018 final rule, we added a new paragraph (d) under § 425.600 to set forth the participation options for ACOs that are experienced or inexperienced with “performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” (which is defined at § 425.20 to include certain Innovation Center ACO models, as well as two-sided risk tracks of the Shared Savings Program). We also finalized the definitions of “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” and “inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” (83 FR 68062). These definitions classify ACOs by experience level based on the percentage of ACO participant TINs that participated in performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives during a 5-year lookback period. However, current regulation text does not specify how CMS determines whether an ACO participant TIN has “participated” in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative. To improve clarity of the regulations, we proposed to codify our existing program policy under which an ACO participant TIN is considered to have participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if it was or will be included in financial reconciliation for a performance year under such initiative during any of the 5 most recent performance years.

Under the December 2018 final rule, an ACO is “inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” (and therefore, eligible to enter an agreement period under the BASIC track's glide path), if less than 40 percent of its ACO participants has participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative in “each” of the 5 most recent performance years prior to its Shared Savings Program agreement start date, and the ACO legal entity has not participated in any performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative (83 FR 67895). Similarly, an ACO is “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” if 40 percent or more of its ACO participants has participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative in “any” of the 5 most recent performance years prior to its Shared Savings Program agreement start date (83 FR 67895). Thus, if 40 percent or more of the entities on an ACO participant list participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative in a single performance year within the 5 most recent performance years, we would determine that the ACO meets the definition of “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives.” Conversely, we would determine that an ACO satisfies the definition of “inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” only if it is below the 40 percent threshold in all of the 5 most recent performance years prior to the ACO's agreement start date. In other words, an ACO is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives as long as it does not meet the definition of “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” in any of the five most recent performance years prior to the ACO's agreement start date. We chose to use a 5-year lookback period for determining whether an ACO is experienced or inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives for a number of reasons, including that it could reduce the incentive for organizations to wait out the period in an effort to establish a new legal entity with the same or very similar composition of ACO participants for purposes of gaming program policies.

We recognized that some ACOs or TINs in performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives participate for only part of a performance year, but our current regulation text does not specify the duration of participation required for CMS to determine that an ACO participant TIN has participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative.

(2) Revisions

We proposed to codify the current operational approach for determining whether an ACO participant has participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative. Under our current operational approach, an ACO participant is considered to have participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if its TIN was or will be used to calculate financial reconciliation for the entity participating in such ACO initiative (“Initiative ACO”). In general, if an ACO participant was included on an Initiative ACO's participant list for a performance year during the 5 most recent performance years before the ACO's agreement start date, and the Initiative ACO is, or will be, financially reconciled for that performance year, the ACO participant will be considered to have participated in the Initiative ACO. This will generally be true regardless of whether the entity leaves the Initiative ACO mid-performance year because its claims experience would still be used in the Initiative ACO's alignment and financial reconciliation for that performance year. If the ACO participant was included on an Initiative ACO's participant list for a performance year during the lookback period, but the ACO voluntarily terminates before the deadline for reconciliation or is otherwise not eligible for reconciliation, the ACO participant will not be considered to have experience with risk because its claims experience would not be used for financial reconciliation.

Except for determinations made regarding AIP ACOs for purposes of § 425.316(e)(2), we determine whether an ACO is experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives prior to the start of an ACO's agreement start date. At the time we make these determinations, the ACO may be in the middle of a PY for which reconciliation has not yet occurred. Nevertheless, we believe that at the time we make these determinations, we have the information necessary to determine whether an ACO or ACO participant TIN will be included in financial reconciliation for a PY in the relevant Medicare ACO initiative because this issue is addressed in the terms of each Medicare ACO initiative. For example, as outlined in § 425.221(b)(2)(ii)(A), if an ACO in a two-sided model terminates from the Shared Savings Program after June 30th of a PY, they will be held responsible for a pro-rated share of any shared losses determined for the performance year during which the termination becomes effective. Any ACO participant TIN that was included on the participant list for that performance year will have been included in beneficiary alignment and their claims experience used to calculate the benchmark and performance year expenditures. For other Medicare ACO initiatives, the terms of the participation agreement specify when the ACO is subject to reconciliation and which TINs will be included in reconciliation.

We proposed to modify the existing definitions for “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” and “inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” at § 425.20 to include the following new sentence at the end of each definition: An ACO participant is considered to have participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if the ACO participant TIN was or will be included in financial reconciliation for one or more performance years under such initiative during any of the 5 most recent performance years. We also proposed a technical correction to remove the language “as defined under this section” from both definitions. We proposed that these amendments would become effective on January 1, 2024.

We solicited comments on the proposed regulation text.

The following is a summary of the comments received on the proposal to codify the existing Shared Savings Program operational approach to specify that CMS determines that an ACO participant TIN participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if it was or will be included on a participant list used in financial reconciliation for a performance year under performance-based risk during the 5 most recent performance years and our responses:

Comment: Commenters supported the proposal to codify the existing Shared Savings Program operational approach to specify that CMS determines that an ACO participant TIN participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if it was or will be included on a participant list used in financial reconciliation for a performance year under performance-based risk during the 5 most recent performance years. Multiple commenters appreciated CMS' transparency regarding program operations.

Response: We thank the commenters for their support and agree that aligning the definitions of “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” and “inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” with current operational methodologies will bring increased clarity and transparency around the determination of experience level.

Comment: While multiple commenters appreciated the additional detail this proposal provides regarding TIN risk experience determination, they requested further clarification on the methodology described. One commenter asked how a determination of experience would be made if a portion of a TIN has participated in performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives during the 5 most recent performance years. In particular, they asked if a TIN would be classified as experienced if one participant in the TIN previously participated in ACO REACH, where participation is determined at the TIN/NPI level. Other commenters advocated for a process where ACOs could submit a reconsideration review if an ACO participant TIN has been determined to have participated in an Innovation Center ACO Model based on a small percentage of NPIs billing under the TIN for a split-TIN model. Both sets of commenters providing these additional suggestions advocated for CMS to align the experience thresholds at the ACO and TIN levels, meaning a TIN would only be considered experienced if 40 percent or more of the NPIs billing under the TIN participated in any performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives.

Response: We thank the commenters for their support to codify the existing operational approach around TIN experience determination. As the commenters stated, the Shared Savings Program identifies participants using full TINs, which requires all individuals and entities that have reassigned their right to receive Medicare payment to the TIN of an ACO participant to participate in the ACO and comply with program requirements (82 FR 53689). As stated in the December 2018 final rule, we believe that defining ACO participants to include all NPIs that have reassigned their billing rights to the TIN is a means to allowing the ACO's redesigned care processes to more broadly reach all Medicare FFS beneficiaries that may receive care from ACO participants, including those that may not meet the program's assignment criteria, and provides incentives for lower performing providers within an ACO participant TIN to improve (83 FR 67874). Additionally, NPIs who have participated in a risk-based arrangement can help facilitate care redesign within their TIN, better preparing the TIN to join a ACO taking on risk. The impact of ACO participant experience can be seen in the shared savings results. Of the ACOs that newly joined the Shared Savings Program in 2022, 88 percent of the ACOs considered experienced with performance-based risk earned shared savings in the first performance year in comparison to 46 percent of the ACOs that were considered inexperienced with performance-based risk.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing without modification the proposed changes to the definitions for “experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” and “inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” at § 425.20. We believe these changes will improve ACO understanding of our current operational policies.

7. Technical Changes to References in Shared Savings Program Regulations

a. References to an ACO's Assignment Methodology Selection

Section 1899(c)(2)(A) of the Act, as amended by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, provides all ACOs with a choice of prospective assignment for agreement periods beginning on or after January 1, 2020. In the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 67859 through 67863), we finalized modifications to the Shared Savings Program's regulations, to separate the choice of beneficiary assignment methodology from the choice of participation track (financial model). We also added a new section of the Shared Savings Program regulations at § 425.226 to govern annual participation elections (see 83 FR 67857 through 67859). In accordance with § 425.226, before the start of a performance year an ACO may make elections related to its participation in the Shared Savings Program, including selection of its beneficiary assignment methodology, which will be effective at the start of the applicable performance year and for the remaining years of the agreement period, unless superseded by a later election. Section 425.226(a)(1) specifies that an ACO may select the assignment methodology that CMS employs for assignment of beneficiaries under subpart E of the Shared Savings Program regulations. An ACO may select either of the following: (i) preliminary prospective assignment with retrospective reconciliation, as described in § 425.400(a)(2); or (ii) prospective assignment, as described in § 425.400(a)(3).

For consistency, in the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 67859 through 67863), we also finalized conforming changes to regulations that previously identified assignment methodologies according to participation track. Among other changes to the Shared Savings Program regulations, we added § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) to establish that for agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, and in subsequent years, the ACO may select the assignment methodology CMS employs for the assignment of beneficiaries. As specified in § 425.400(a)(4)(ii)(B), this selection of assignment methodology is made prior to the start of each agreement period and may be modified prior to the start of each performance year as specified in § 425.226 (83 FR 67863).

Although §§ 425.226(a)(1) and 425.400(a)(4)(ii) both reference assignment methodology selection, there are key differences in the purpose each section serves in directing action from the ACO versus action that CMS initiates. Section 425.226 states that the initial selection of, and any annual selection for a change in, beneficiary assignment methodology by an ACO must be made in the form and manner and according to the timeframe, that we establish. Therefore, § 425.226(a)(1) is the relevant regulation for referencing the ACO's option to select and to change its selection of assignment methodology. That is, § 425.226 describes actions for which the ACO is responsible because the ACO is selecting the assignment methodology that will be effective at the beginning of the ACO's agreement period or making a change to the ACO's prior assignment methodology selection that will become effective at the beginning of the next performance year.

In comparison, § 425.400 outlines how we employ the assignment methodology described in §§ 425.402 and 425.404 for purposes of benchmarking, preliminary prospective assignment (including quarterly updates), retrospective reconciliation, and prospective assignment. Therefore, § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) is the relevant regulation for referencing how we determine the assignment methodology to be used in the referenced program operations or program calculations. That is, § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) governs actions undertaken by us because we are applying the ACO's selected assignment methodology when determining benchmarking, preliminary prospective assignment, retrospective reconciliation, and prospective assignment.

Throughout the current Shared Savings Program regulations text, there are various references to § 425.226(a)(1) or § 425.400(a)(4)(ii). We conducted a review of the Shared Savings Program regulations text to determine whether the existing 12 references to either § 425.226(a)(1) or § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) align with provisions' intended purposes. We also considered the intended purposes of the provisions in identifying the appropriate cross-reference to include in the proposed new regulation at § 425.655, which is described in section III.G.4.b. of this final rule.

We believe the following five references to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) are consistent with the intended purpose of § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) because they refer to how we determine the ACO's chosen assignment methodology for purposes of determining beneficiary assignment or performing certain program calculations: § 425.609(c)(1); § 425.652(a)(5)(v)(A) and (b)(2)(iv)(A); § 425.654(a)(1)(i); and § 425.656(b)(3).

We believe the following two references to § 425.226(a)(1) are consistent with the intended purpose of § 425.226(a)(1) because the references are used when referring to the ACO's option to change its selection of assignment methodology: § 425.601(a)(9) introductory text; and § 425.652(a)(9) introductory text.

We identified five inconsistencies in references to §§ 425.226(a)(1) and 425.400(a)(4)(ii) that we proposed to revise in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (see 88 FR 52490). To follow is a description of the five references that we proposed to revise in 42 CFR part 425, subpart G to ensure that the appropriate assignment selection reference is being cited, for clarity and consistency.

For performance years starting on January 1, 2019, and subsequent performance years, we add beneficiaries to an ACO's list of assigned beneficiaries based on a beneficiary's designation of an ACO professional as the provider or supplier they consider responsible for coordinating their overall care, if certain conditions are satisfied, including the conditions specified in § 425.402(e)(2)(ii)(A). In accordance with § 425.402(e)(2)(ii)(A), the beneficiary must meet the eligibility criteria established at § 425.401(a) and must not be excluded by the criteria at § 425.401(b). Further, § 425.402(e)(2)(ii)(A) specifies that the exclusion criteria at § 425.401(b) apply for purposes of determining beneficiary eligibility for alignment to an ACO based on the beneficiary's designation of an ACO professional as responsible for coordinating their overall care under § 425.402(e), regardless of the ACO's assignment methodology selection under § 425.400(a)(4)(ii). The citation to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) in § 425.402(e)(2)(ii)(A) is not consistent with the intended purpose of the reference, which is to refer to the ACO's option to change its assignment methodology selection. Therefore, in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52490), we proposed to amend § 425.402(e)(2)(ii)(A) by removing the reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) and adding in its place a reference to § 425.226(a)(1), for clarity and consistency.

The introductory text of § 425.601(a) (applicable to agreement periods beginning on or after July 1, 2019, and before January 1, 2024) and of § 425.652(a) (applicable to agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years) specify that in computing an ACO's historical benchmark for its first agreement period under the Shared Savings Program, we determine the per capita Parts A and B FFS expenditures for beneficiaries that would have been assigned to the ACO in any of the 3 most recent years prior to the start of the agreement period using the ACO participant TINs identified before the start of the agreement period as required under § 425.118(a) and the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the first performance year of the agreement period as required under § 425.226(a)(1). Accordingly, the introductory text in § 425.601(a) and in § 425.652(a) is describing how we will compute expenditures for beneficiaries that would have been assigned to the ACO based on the assignment methodology selected by the ACO. These provisions are referring to how we determine the assignment methodology to be used to identify the beneficiary population that would have been assigned in the three benchmark years, not to the ACO's act of selecting the assignment methodology. Therefore, in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (see 88 FR 52490), we proposed to amend the introductory text of § 425.601(a) and of § 425.652(a) by removing the references to § 425.226(a)(1) and adding in their place references to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), for clarity and consistency.

Section 425.652(a)(9)(ii) specifies that for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, when adjusting the benchmark for certain changes during the agreement period, we redetermine the regional adjustment amount under § 425.656 according to the ACO's assigned beneficiaries for BY3, and based on the assignable population of beneficiaries identified for the assignment window corresponding to BY3 that is consistent with the assignment window that applies under the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.226(a)(1). In § 425.652(a)(9)(ii), the reference to § 425.226(a)(1) is not consistent with the intended purpose of the reference, which is to specify how we determine the assignment methodology that will be used to identify the assigned beneficiary and assignable beneficiary populations for purposes of redetermining the regional adjustment amount in the event the ACO changes its selected assignment methodology for a performance year. Therefore, in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52490), we proposed to amend § 425.652(a)(9)(ii) by removing the reference to § 425.226(a)(1) and adding in its place the reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), for clarity and consistency.

Section 425.652(a)(9)(iv) describes that for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, when adjusting the benchmark for certain changes during the agreement period, we redetermine the proration factor used in calculating the prior savings adjustment under § 425.658(b)(3)(ii) to account for changes in the ACO's assigned beneficiary population in the benchmark years of the ACO's current agreement period due to the addition and removal of ACO participants or ACO providers/suppliers in accordance with § 425.118(b), a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection under § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), or changes to the beneficiary assignment methodology under 42 CFR part 425, subpart E. In § 425.652(a)(9)(iv), the reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), is not consistent with the intended purpose of the reference, which is to specify that we will redetermine the proration factor used in calculating the prior savings adjustment if the ACO changes its beneficiary assignment methodology selection. Therefore, we proposed to amend § 425.652(a)(9)(iv) by removing the reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) and adding in its place a reference to § 425.226(a)(1), for clarity and consistency.

We solicited comments on these proposed technical changes.

We received public comments on these proposals. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: All commenters supported these proposals and provided no further elaboration or suggestions, stating that these technical changes will eliminate errors and inconsistencies and improve clarity in the regulatory text:

Response: We agree with commenters that these technical changes will eliminate errors and inconsistencies and improve clarity in the regulatory text.

We are finalizing the proposal to amend five inconsistencies in references to §§ 425.226(a)(1) and 425.400(a)(4)(ii). Specifically, we are finalizing the following:

• Amend § 425.402(e)(2)(ii)(A) by removing the reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) and adding in its place a reference to § 425.226(a)(1).

• Amend the introductory text of § 425.601(a) and of § 425.652(a) by removing the reference to § 425.226(a)(1) and adding in its place a reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

• Revise § 425.652(a)(9)(ii) to remove the reference to § 425.226(a)(1) and include a reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii), among other revisions to this paragraph that we are finalizing with this final rule (see section III.G.3.a. of this final rule).

• Amend § 425.652(a)(9)(iv) by removing the reference to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii) and adding in its place a reference to § 425.226(a)(1).

b. Definition of Rural Health Clinic

In the November 2011 final rule, we established a definition for the term “Rural health center (RHC)” for the Shared Savings Program at § 425.20. 288 The definition of “Rural health center (RHC)” at § 425.20 states that this term has the same meaning given to this term under § 405.2401(b). The term “Rural health clinic (RHC)” is defined at § 405.2401(b) to mean a facility that has—

288 See, for example, 76 FR 67930 through 67932 (discussion of our proposal to define FQHCs and RHCs as these terms are defined in § 405.2401(b)), and 76 FR 67974 and 67975 (finalized regulations text for § 425.20).

• Been determined by the Secretary to meet the requirements of section 1861(aa)(2) of the Act and 42 CFR part 491 concerning RHC services and conditions for approval; and

• Filed an agreement with CMS that meets the requirements in § 405.2402 to provide RHC services under Medicare.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52490 and 52491), we explained that the inconsistency between § 425.20, which inaccurately uses the word “center,” and § 405.2401(b), which accurately uses the word “clinic,” had recently came to our attention. We noted that the term “rural health clinic” was in use and defined at § 405.2401(b) when we established the term and definition for “Rural health center (RHC)” under part 425 with the November 2011 final rule. Furthermore, we noted that in the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67803), we separately established an acronym “RHCs” for “Rural Health Clinics” in the acronyms list reflecting the accurate term.

To ensure clarity and accuracy, we proposed to correct the error in the definition for “Rural health center (RHC)” at § 425.20 by replacing the word “center” with the word “clinic”. We also clarified that all uses of the acronym “RHC” or “RHCs” throughout part 425—including in the definition of “primary care physician” in § 425.20, as well as in §§ 425.102 and 425.304 and throughout 42 CFR part 425, subpart E—have been interpreted to refer to “rural health clinic” or “rural health clinics” as defined at § 405.2401(b). Further, we proposed to revise the definition of rural health center in § 425.20 to specify that the referenced provision at § 405.2401(b) is within 42 CFR Chapter IV. We solicited comments on these proposed technical changes.

We received public comments on these proposals. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: All commenters supported these proposals and provided no further elaboration or suggestions, stating that these technical changes will eliminate errors and inconsistencies and improve clarity in the regulatory text.

Response: We agree with commenters that these technical changes will eliminate errors and inconsistencies and improve clarity in the regulatory text.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing as proposed.

c. Definition of At-Risk Beneficiary

In the November 2011 final rule (see 76 FR 67974), we established the definition of “At-risk beneficiary” at § 425.20, the meaning of which includes, but is not limited to, a beneficiary who—

• Has a high-risk score on the CMS-HCC risk adjustment model;

• Is considered high cost due to having two or more hospitalizations or emergency room visits each year;

• Is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid;

• Has a high utilization pattern;

• Has one or more chronic conditions;

• Has had a recent diagnosis that is expected to result in increased cost;

• Is entitled to Medicaid because of disability; or

• Is diagnosed with a mental health or substance abuse disorder.

In the November 2011 final rule, we explained that we agreed with commenters that our proposed definition of at-risk beneficiary should be expanded to include patients who are entitled to Medicare (emphasis added) because of disability (see 76 FR 67950). However, in codifying the relevant regulation text at § 425.20, we inadvertently referred to patients who are entitled to Medicaid because of disability (emphasis added). In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52491), we noted that an individual who is entitled to Medicare because of disability and who is also entitled to Medicaid, would be included under the category “Is dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.”

We proposed to correct the typographical error in the definition for “At-risk beneficiary” at § 425.20 by replacing the word “Medicaid” in paragraph (7) with the word “Medicare”. We also proposed to adjust inaccurate punctuation in the list of paragraphs within this definition by replacing the period at the end of paragraphs (5) and (6) with a semi-colon. We solicited comments on these proposed changes.

We received public comments on these proposals. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: All commenters supported these proposals and provided no further elaboration or suggestions, stating that these technical changes will eliminate errors and inconsistencies and improve clarity in the regulatory text.

Response: We agree with commenters that these technical changes will eliminate errors and inconsistencies and improve clarity in the regulatory text.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing as proposed.

d. Updating Terminology in Regulations on Data Sharing with ACOs

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52491), we explained that it had come to our attention that certain terminology that is used in the data sharing regulations for the Shared Savings Program in 42 CFR part 425, subpart H is outdated or inconsistent with the terminology used elsewhere in the Medicare program and in the HIPAA regulations in 45 CFR part 164. We proposed technical and conforming changes to § 425.702(c)(1)(ii)(A)( 3 ) and § 425.702(c)(1)(ii) for clarity and consistency.

In accordance with the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA), CMS discontinued the use of Social Security Number-based Health Insurance Claim Numbers (HICNs) as the beneficiary identifier on Medicare cards and replaced that identifier type with Medicare Beneficiary Identifiers (MBIs) by April 2019. MBIs are now used for Medicare transactions like billing, eligibility status, and claim status. All claims with a date of service on or after January 1, 2020, must use the beneficiary's MBI, rather than the HICN. 289 290 To accommodate this change from HICN to MBI, starting in PY 2018 we revised Shared Savings Program reports that provide beneficiary-identifiable information under § 425.702, and claim and claim line feed files with beneficiary identifiable claims data provided under § 425.704, to include a field for the beneficiary's MBI. By the end of PY 2019, we discontinued populating data in the HICN fields. However, when we made this operational update, we did not make conforming changes to the regulations text at § 425.702(c)(1)(ii)(A) to revise the list of the four data elements we provide to ACOs on their FFS beneficiary population: (1) beneficiary name; (2) date of birth; (3) HICN; and (4) sex. Therefore, because we have discontinued use of the HICN, we proposed to revise § 425.702(c)(1)(ii)(A)( 3 ) to refer to “Beneficiary identifier” instead of “Health Insurance Claim Number (HICN).” We explained that this change to the regulations text would not change the information that is provided to ACOs pursuant to § 425.702(c)(1)(ii).

289 CMS, MLN Matters, “New Medicare Beneficiary Identifier (MBI) Get It, Use It”. Article number SE18006, revised March 19, 2020. Available at https://www.cms.gov/outreach-and-education/medicare-learning-network-mln/mlnmattersarticles/downloads/se18006.pdf. 290 CMS.gov website, Medicare Beneficiary Identifiers (MBIs), at https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/New-Medicare-Card.

Further, we proposed to revise the list of purposes in § 425.702(c)(1)(ii) for which an ACO may request certain beneficiary-identifiable data for purposes of population-based activities to better align with the terminology used in the first paragraph of the definition of health care operations at 45 CFR 164.501. Specifically, we proposed to remove the reference to “process development” and to add in its place a reference to “protocol development.” In prior rulemaking, we indicated that ACOs could request beneficiary-identifiable data under § 425.702(c)(1)(ii) for purposes of carrying out population-based activities, including process development, and we referred to care coordination processes and required process development under § 425.112 (see 80 FR 32734 and 32735). In the proposed rule, we stated that we did not believe the proposed revision would impact ACOs' ability to request data for these types of process development. Rather, activities related to care coordination processes and the development of required processes under § 425.112 would continue to fall within the population-based activities listed in § 425.702(c)(1)(ii) for which an ACO may request data, including protocol development (as added by this proposed revision) and care coordination. We also noted that this proposed revision would ensure that the terminology used in § 425.702(c)(1)(ii) is consistent with the language of the proposed new provision at § 425.702(c)(1)(iii) (see section III.G.2.b.(2) of this final rule for a discussion of this proposal).

We solicited comments on these proposed changes.

We received public comments on these proposals. The following is a summary of the comments we received and our responses.

Comment: All commenters supported these proposals and provided no further elaboration or suggestions, stating that these technical changes will eliminate errors and inconsistencies and improve clarity in the regulatory text.

Response: We agree with commenters that these technical changes will eliminate errors and inconsistencies and improve clarity in the regulatory text.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing as proposed.

8. Comment Solicitation on Potential Future Developments to Shared Savings Program Policies

a. Background

As we described in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52492), in an article published on the New England Journal of Medicine's website on April 27, 2022, 291 CMS articulated a vision for how ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program and in Innovation Center models can help CMS achieve its goal of having all beneficiaries in Original Medicare cared for by health care providers who are accountable for the cost and quality of care by 2030. This article describes a vision for the Shared Savings Program and new Innovation Center models to expand participation in ACOs, strengthen incentives for savings for participants and for Medicare, and make access to ACOs more equitable, including: (1) aligning features of new Innovation Center models and features in the Shared Savings Program; (2) adopting lessons from the ACO Investment Model to help provide upfront investments for small ACOs that lack experience with performance-based risk; (3) examining benchmarking approaches that could support increased participation, including among organizations serving patients with high costs of care, and addressing the effects of rebasing and regional benchmark adjustments; and (4) examining the use of incentives to recruit health care providers that care for underserved populations to join ACOs, with the goal of closing gaps in outcomes, and asking health care providers to consider beneficiaries' social needs in care plans.

291 Jacobs D, Rawal P, Fowler L, Seshamani M. Expanding Accountable Care's Reach among Medicare Beneficiaries. NEJM.org, April 27, 2022, available at https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp2202991.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69777 through 69968), we adopted several policies to advance these goals, including providing advance shared savings payments in the form of AIPs to certain new, low revenue ACOs that they can use to build the infrastructure needed to succeed in the Shared Savings Program and promote equity by holistically addressing beneficiary needs, including social needs; reinstating a sliding scale reflecting an ACO's quality performance for use in determining shared savings for ACOs and shared losses for ENHANCED track ACOs; modifying the benchmarking methodology to strengthen financial incentives for long-term participation by reducing the impact of ACOs' performance and market penetration on their benchmarks; supporting the business case for ACOs serving high-risk and a high proportion of dually eligible populations to participate; mitigating bias in regional expenditure calculations for ACOs electing prospective assignment; and expanding opportunities for certain low revenue ACOs participating in the BASIC track to share in savings.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52492), we explained that we have also continued to receive significant input from interested parties regarding opportunities to increase participation in ACO initiatives. One such option would be to identify ways that the Shared Savings Program can support ACOs' efforts to strengthen primary care, such as by providing prospective payments for primary care that would reduce reliance on FFS payments and support innovations in care delivery that better meet beneficiary needs and increase access to primary care in underserved communities. Empirical data support the notion that primary care serves as the foundation of high-performing ACOs. ACO performance results have indicated that ACOs comprised of 75 percent or more of primary care clinicians share in savings at almost twice the rate of those ACOs comprised of less than 75 percent primary care clinicians. 292 Another option would be to offer a higher risk track in the Shared Savings Program.

292 Refer to CMS, Press Release, “Medicare Shared Savings Program Saves Medicare More Than $1.6 Billion in 2021 and Continues to Deliver High-quality Care” (August 30, 2022), available at—As of August 30, 2022, available at https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/medicare-shared-savings-program-saves-medicare-more-16-billion-2021-and-continues-deliver-high.

We solicited public comments on potential future developments to Shared Savings Program policies (88 FR 52492 through 52497).

b. Incorporating a Higher Risk Track Than the ENHANCED Track

As described in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52492), CMS, over time, has considered a higher risk Shared Savings Program track under which the shared savings/loss rate would be somewhere between 80 percent and 100 percent (that is, a rate higher than that currently offered under the ENHANCED track) that builds on the experience of the Next Generation ACO (NGACO) and ACO Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (ACO REACH) Models. “Higher risk” sharing provides a higher level of potential reward which may encourage ACOs that would not otherwise have participated in the Shared Savings Program because of current limitations on potential upside to consider participating. Also, a higher risk sharing model may incentivize participating ACOs to take on more risk (and potential reward) and incentivize ACOs to improve performance in the program, which may result in reduced healthcare costs for Medicare, and more effective, efficient care for beneficiaries. In addition, higher risk sharing may incentivize ACOs to develop new care delivery strategies, such as a focus on specialty care integration and reduced care fragmentation. Offering a higher risk sharing track may also help CMS reach our goal of having all beneficiaries in Original Medicare in a care relationship with a health care provider who is accountable for the costs and quality of their care by 2030 by encouraging efficient ACOs to continue participation in the Shared Savings Program.

Currently, under the Shared Savings Program, ACOs may enter participation agreements under one of two tracks—the BASIC track or the ENHANCED track. The BASIC track allows eligible ACOs to begin under a one-sided model and incrementally transition to higher levels of risk and potential reward through the BASIC track's glide path. The ENHANCED track is a two-sided model that represents the highest level of risk and potential reward currently offered under the Shared Savings Program. The rules governing the participation options available to ACOs and the progression from lower to higher risk for ACOs entering the program are described in § 425.600 of the regulations.

Under the BASIC track, eligible ACOs operate under either a one-sided model or a two-sided model, either sharing savings only or sharing both savings and losses with the Medicare program. Under the BASIC track's glide path, the level of risk and potential reward phases in over the course of an agreement period with the ACO beginning participation under a one-sided model and progressing to incrementally higher levels of risk and potential reward, unless the ACO chooses to begin under a two-sided model and/or progresses more quickly than the glide path would require. 293 The glide path includes five levels (Levels A through E). Levels A and B are one-sided models (shared savings only); 294 and Levels C, D, and E are two-sided models (shared savings and shared losses) that provide for incrementally higher performance-based risk. 295 An ACO in the ENHANCED track operates under a two-sided model, sharing both savings and losses with the Medicare program, for all five performance years of the agreement period.

293 Refer to § 425.600(a)(4)(i).

294 Refer to §§ 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A)( 1 ), 425.605(d)(1)(i) (Level A); §§ 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A)( 2 ), 425.605(d)(1)(ii) (Level B).

295 Refer to §§ 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A)( 3 ), 425.605(d)(1)(iii) (Level C); §§ 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A)( 4 ), 425.605(d)(1)(iv) (Level D); §§ 425.600(a)(4)(i)(A)( 5 ), 425.605(d)(1)(v) (Level E).

To qualify for a shared savings payment, an ACO must meet a minimum savings rate (MSR) requirement, meet the quality performance standard or alternative quality performance standard established under § 425.512, and otherwise maintain its eligibility to participate in the Shared Savings Program under 42 CFR part 425. 296 For ACOs meeting the applicable quality performance standard established under § 425.512(a)(2), (4)(i) (for PY 2022 and PY 2023), or (5)(i) (for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years), the final shared savings rate is equal to the maximum sharing rate specific to the ACO's track/level of participation as follows: 40 percent for ACOs participating in Level A or Level B of the BASIC track; 297 50 percent for ACOs participating in Levels C, D, or E of the BASIC track; 298 and 75 percent for ACOs participating in the ENHANCED track. 299 Beginning in PY 2023, ACOs meeting the MSR requirement that do not meet the applicable quality performance standard established under § 425.512(a)(2), (4)(i) or (5)(i), as applicable, but meet the alternative quality performance standard described in § 425.512(a)(4)(ii) (for PY 2023) or (5)(ii) (for PY 2024 and subsequent performance years) will have the opportunity to share in savings at a lower rate that is scaled by the ACO's quality performance. Additionally, beginning in PY 2024, certain ACOs participating in the BASIC track that do not meet the MSR have the opportunity to share in savings at a rate that is equal to half of the rate to which they would have otherwise been entitled had they met the MSR. 300 CMS computes an ACO's shared savings payment by applying the final sharing rate to the ACO's savings on a first dollar basis (meaning the final sharing rate is applied to the ACO's full total savings amount), with the payment subject to a cap that is equal to 10 percent of the updated benchmark for an ACO in the BASIC track or 20 percent of the updated benchmark for an ACO in the ENHANCED track. 301

296 Refer to §§ 425.100(b), 425.604(c), 425.605(c), 425.606(c), 425.610(c).

297 Refer to § 425.605(d)(1)(i)(A), (d)(1)(ii)(A).

298 Refer to § 425.605(d)(1)(iii)(A), (d)(1)(iv)(A), (d)(1)(v)(A).

299 Refer to § 425.610(d).

300 Refer to § 425.605(h).

301 Refer to § 425.605(d); § 425.610(e).

ACOs that operate under a two-sided model and have losses that meet or exceed a minimum loss rate (MLR) must share losses with the Medicare program. 302 Once this MLR is met or exceeded, the ACO will share in losses at a rate determined according to the ACO's track/level of participation, up to a loss recoupment limit (also referred to as the loss sharing limit). 303 In determining shared losses, ACOs participating in Level C, D, or E of the BASIC track are subject to a fixed shared loss rate (also referred to as the loss sharing rate) of 30 percent. 304 ENHANCED track ACOs are subject to a loss rate that is scaled by the ACO's quality performance, subject to a minimum of 40 percent and a maximum of 75 percent. 305

302 Refer to § 425.100(c).

303 Refer to § 425.605(d); § 425.610(f), (g).

304 Refer to § 425.605(d)(1)(iii)(C), (d)(1)(iv)(C), (d)(1)(v)(C).

305 Refer to § 425.610(f).

For agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, certain ACOs were only allowed to enter the program in the ENHANCED track, and ACOs entering the program in the BASIC track were limited in how many agreement periods they could participate in the BASIC track before being required to transition to the ENHANCED track. Based on changes finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69818 through 69821), for agreement periods starting on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, participation in the ENHANCED track will be optional.

In the NGACO Model, NGACOs were offered the choice between two risk arrangements, partial risk or full risk. Under both arrangements, the NGACO was responsible for 100 percent of performance year expenditures, for services rendered to the NGACO's aligned beneficiaries. 306 Under the partial risk arrangement, the NGACO could receive or owe up to 80 percent of savings/losses, whereas under the full risk arrangement, the NGACO could receive or owe up to 100 percent of savings/losses. To mitigate the ACO's risk of large shared losses, as well as to protect the Medicare Trust Funds against paying out excessive shared savings, NGACOs were required to choose a cap on gross savings/losses. The cap, expressed as a percentage of the benchmark, ranged from 5 percent to 15 percent. The risk arrangement chosen by the NGACO (80 or 100 percent) was applied to gross savings or losses after the application of the cap. In PYs 1-3, a discount was applied to the NGACO's benchmark that was set at a standard 3 percent, with various adjustments, that allowed the final discount to vary from 0.5 percent to 4.5 percent. In PYs 4-6, a discount of 0.5 percent was applied to the benchmark under the partial risk arrangement, and a discount of 1.25 was applied to the benchmark under the full risk arrangement. The purpose of the discount was to ensure that CMS received a financial benefit from any savings achieved by the NGACOs participating in the model.

306 In 2020, due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, NGACOs were offered an optional amendment to the Participation Agreement (PA) for 2020 (PY5). For NGACOs that signed the amendment, CMS removed all beneficiary experience associated with COVID-19 related admissions and retrospectively updated the prospective trend with a regional observed trend. For 2021, CMS modified the NGACO financial methodology to provide financial protection to all NGACOs continuing in the model for PY6. PY6 financial protections included: adoption of an extreme and uncontrollable circumstances policy, under which any shared losses were prorated based on the number of months during the PHE and the number of beneficiaries residing in an impacted area, and all expenses associated with COVID-19 related admissions were removed from both PY expenditures and retrospective trend.

Under the ACO REACH Model, REACH ACOs are offered the choice of participating under the Global or the Professional Risk Sharing Options. As in the NGACO Model, under both risk sharing options, the REACH ACO is responsible for 100 percent of performance year expenditures for services rendered to aligned beneficiaries. Because ACOs electing the Global Risk Sharing Option retain up to 100 percent of the savings/losses, a discount is applied to the benchmark to ensure savings are also generated for CMS. Consequently, for ACOs in the Global Risk Sharing Option, the benchmark is reduced by a fixed percentage based on the performance year. 307 The benchmark for ACOs participating in the Professional Risk Sharing Option does not include this discount, and these ACOs are only eligible to retain 50 percent of savings or owe 50 percent of any losses.

307 For more details, refer to CMS, ACO Realizing Equity, Access, and Community Health (REACH) Model, PY2023 Financial Settlement Overview, available at https://innovation.cms.gov/media/document/aco-reach-py2023-fncl-settlement (see Table 4: Schedule of Discounts by Risk Arrangement).

As we explained in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (see 88 FR 52493 through 52494), when considering including a higher risk track in the Shared Savings Program, we must balance several factors to protect beneficiaries, ACOs, and the Medicare Trust Funds. One factor to consider is that there may be selective participation with regard to which ACOs would choose to participate in a higher risk track, if offered. For example, Shared Savings Program ACOs that have a history of high levels of shared savings or have received a favorable high regional adjustment to their benchmark may be more likely than other ACOs to switch to the higher risk track upon renewing or early renewing their participation in the program so they can receive additional benefit from the higher levels of potential reward offered in a higher risk track. Section 1899(i)(3) of the Act grants the Secretary the authority to use other payment models, if the Secretary determines that doing so would improve the quality and efficiency of items and services furnished under Medicare, and the alternative methodology would result in program expenditures equal to or lower than those that would result under the statutory payment model under section 1899(d) of the Act. In the proposed rule, we expressed concerns that introducing a higher risk track would lead to only select ACOs participating, creating benefits limited almost entirely to those ACOs and limited to no benefits for beneficiaries or CMS.

Another consideration we explained in the proposed rule is that ACOs in a higher risk track could have an increased incentive (relative to existing Shared Savings Program risk models) to avoid high-cost beneficiaries in the performance year in order to maximize their potential shared savings payment or avoid or reduce potential shared losses. The Shared Savings Program truncates individual beneficiary expenditures at the 99th percentile of national Medicare FFS expenditures by enrollment type, which can help to protect ACOs from the impact of expenditure outliers (that is, to prevent a small number of extremely costly beneficiaries from significantly affecting the ACO's per capita expenditures) and reduce the incentive for ACOs to avoid high-cost beneficiaries. As described earlier in this section of this final rule, the Shared Savings Program also caps the amount of shared savings an ACO may receive or the amount of shared losses it may owe, which can further discourage beneficiary selection. If introducing a higher risk track to the program, we would need to consider whether the program's existing approach to expenditure truncation and capping shared savings and shared losses would be sufficient in curbing incentives for ACOs to engage in beneficiary selection in light of the higher potential risk and reward, while ensuring that the new risk model will still be attractive to ACOs and improve the quality and efficiency of the care their assigned beneficiaries receive.

When considering a higher risk track, we would need to balance the incentives for ACOs to transition to higher levels of risk and potential reward only when they are very confident it is in their financial interest to do so, with the benefits of increasing ACO participation in the Shared Savings Program and in two-sided accountable care tracks, all while ensuring sufficient financial safeguards against inappropriately large shared losses for ACOs coordinating and improving quality of care for high-cost beneficiaries.

In the proposed rule (88 FR 52492 through 52494), we sought comment on the following: (1) policies/model design elements that could be implemented so that a higher risk track could be offered without increasing program expenditures; (2) ways to protect ACOs serving high-risk beneficiaries from expenditure outliers and reduce incentives for ACOs to avoid high-risk beneficiaries; and (3) the impact that higher sharing rates could have on care delivery redesign, specialty integration, and ACO investment in health care providers and practices.

The following is a summary of the public comments we received in response to the comment solicitation on incorporating a higher risk track than the ENHANCED track and our response:

Comment: Many commenters supported a higher risk track option in the Shared Savings Program. Commenters offered a variety of reasons for their support of a higher risk track, including that it would encourage more participation in the Shared Savings Program, bring more beneficiaries into an accountable care arrangement, improve care delivery, and could serve as a track for ACO REACH Model participants to transition into the Shared Savings Program, if the track is designed somewhat similarly to ACO REACH Model (for example, by offering options regarding the shared savings rate, options for waivers, and an option for paper-based voluntary alignment), after the ACO REACH Model expires at the end of 2026. Some commenters suggested that if CMS adopted certain design features, such as waivers to permit a home visit program and a tool that allows providers to receive advance payment for non-primary care services, those design features could lead ACOs to generate more savings and spur innovation. Multiple commenters requested that the higher risk track be optional. Several commenters requested that CMS use lessons learned from the NGACO Model and the ACO REACH Model when designing a higher risk track, specifically lessons relating to benefit enhancements and beneficiary engagement incentives, such as the post-discharge home visit waiver, care management home visit waiver, tailored Part B cost sharing support, SNF 3-day waiver, and telehealth waiver. One commenter recommended the higher risk track be offered within the Shared Savings Program, as opposed to being within a new ACO model offered by the Innovation Center.

Many commenters provided input on financial model design elements for a higher risk track. One key design element discussed was the shared savings/shared losses rate. Several commenters supported a full risk model; that is, a model with a 100 percent shared savings/shared losses rate. Many of these commenters paired their support for a full risk model with other financial model design elements such as risk corridors, stop-loss insurance, caps on shared savings and shared losses, or discounts to the benchmark. Several commenters suggested that CMS should offer a choice between a full-risk model with a discount, or a shared savings rate of 85 or 90 percent, with some of these commenters specifically citing the ACO REACH Model and NGACO Model as precedent for these arrangements.

A couple of commenters requested design elements that would result in asymmetrical upside versus downside financial risk. One commenter suggested a shared savings rate of at least 85 percent, with a cap on gross shared savings not to exceed 20 percent of the ACO's updated benchmark, along with a shared loss rate that is between 55 percent and 75 percent, with a cap on gross shared losses not to exceed 15 percent of the ACO's updated benchmark. Another commenter suggested that CMS offer an asymmetric shared savings rate and shared loss rate, where the rates would start off as symmetrical but would be “offset. . .in opposite directions based on an ACO's proportion of underserved beneficiaries,” and explained their belief that this option could offer a higher shared savings rate while safeguarding ACOs from inappropriately large shared losses. As another option, the commenter suggested CMS explore an “asymmetric MSR/MLR option, where the offset factor is based on the ACO's proportion of underserved beneficiaries,” and explained their belief that such an option would protect ACOs with high proportion of underserved beneficiaries from being accountable for unforeseen losses, while increasing the likelihood of becoming eligible to share in savings.

Multiple comments included input on the level of any discount to benchmark. A couple of commenters recommended the discount be capped at 50 percent of the average shared savings rate among all ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program. Several commenters expressed concerns that the level of the discount may end up being set too high for them to want to participate. One commenter stated that a discount of 3 percent would be a dealbreaker for many ACOs. Another commenter recommended that the discount be no more than 2 percent. A couple of commenters expressed concern that in the ACO REACH Model, ACOs had average net savings of less than 1 percent after the discount was incorporated. Several commenters stated that, for a full risk model with a 3 percent discount, they would need to generate savings of at least 12 percent to earn more than they would earn in the ENHANCED track.

A few commenters recommended changing the benchmarking methodology for a higher-risk track. Suggestions included using regional-based benchmarks, using a fully administratively-set benchmark, removing the cap on regional adjustments, and applying an offset factor creating asymmetry between the MSR and MLR for an ACO based on its proportion of underserved beneficiaries. Some of these commenters stated that a track with higher risk should have more innovative benchmarking policies, and others stated that benchmark setting should reward risk-taking by ACOs whose assigned beneficiaries include high-needs populations.

Many commenters recommended that providers participating in the higher risk track be paid using a payment methodology other than Medicare FFS payment, including “prospective payments for primary care,” “prospective payments,” primary care or total cost of care “capitation payments,” “population-based payments,” payments for “team-based care,” “advanced payment option,” “bundled payments,” and a “hybrid payment option that includes primary care capitation.” Some commenters suggested that payments under these alternative payment methods should be available as of January 1, 2025, so that primary care practices do not feel compelled to leave ACOs for the sole purpose of accessing prospective primary care payments in the Making Care Primary model. One commenter stated that a total cost of care capitation option would support ACOs interested in better engaging specialists through mechanisms such as shadow bundles. 308 One commenter requested that flexibility be offered in selecting the level of capitation, including the selection of the specific services subject to capitation. The commenter stated that this flexibility would allow more small, independent, and new entrant practices to participate in a new higher risk track. A few commenters suggested that an alternative payment method be treated like any other Medicare Part B expenditure for purposes of benchmark and shared savings calculations.

308 Shadow bundles are data that provide information on specialists' care patterns and clinical episodes of care. They are developed using existing assignment and claims data, and they assign services and associated payments to clinical episodes and provide additional information on procedural or condition-specific care.

Commenters had differing views as to whether the new payments under a higher risk track should be made to ACOs or directly to providers and suppliers. A couple of commenters suggested that the ACO should have a choice of whether CMS makes prospective payments to the ACO or directly to the primary care practices, stating that “ACOs composed of independent practices who have joined together to participate in the Shared Savings Program typically need to share services through the ACO” and, in these cases, “paying the prospective payment directly to the ACO makes the most sense.” A few commenters suggested there be “safeguards to ensure investments,” which we understand to mean prospective payments, reach primary care practices. One commenter stated that prospective payments to physicians are important so that physicians have the resources they need to proactively manage patients' care. Several commenters suggested that we establish clear guidelines for what portion of a capitated payment an ACO itself may retain, rather than share with its ACO participants. Commenters also requested that we “require ACOs receiving capitated payments to help participating practices build the capacity to independently receive and effectively use prospective payments to support the provision of comprehensive primary care.” One commenter mentioned that ACOs have varying organizational structures which will require CMS to take a very thoughtful approach to ensure payments intended to support primary care, including capitated or per patient per month payments, reach the primary care practices where physicians and care teams are delivering the care. Another commenter preferred an approach under which CMS would make capitated payments directly to primary care practices, but also stated that another option would be to make capitated payments to ACOs with stipulations that establish the maximum level of retention of those payments by ACOs and to establish a strong audit mechanism and financial penalties for non-compliance.

Several commenters provided input on the amount of payments for primary care services under a higher risk track. Some of these commenters requested that the ACO receive prospective primary care payments in an amount greater than Medicare's historical payments to the ACO's primary care providers to provide funds for innovative care delivery strategies. Another commenter suggested that monthly primary care capitation payments be set equal to 100 percent of an ACO's historical primary care spending, stating that this would provide important cash flow opportunities for ACOs looking to make proactive investments in primary care capacity to better manage patient care. One of the commenters requested CMS provide ACOs with the ability to gradually increase to higher levels of capitation payments, like Comprehensive Primary Care Plus Track 2.

Many commenters suggested ways to protect ACOs serving high-risk beneficiaries from expenditure outliers and reduce incentives for ACOs to avoid high-risk beneficiaries. Several commenters suggested that CMS incorporate risk corridors or risk adjustment to account for treatment of complex and high-cost beneficiaries. A few commenters encouraged CMS to evaluate the applicability of some of the safeguards and policies in place under the ACO REACH Model that aim to reduce the potential for cherry-picking of beneficiaries, mitigate the potential of “bad actors,” and ensure appropriate resources for higher cost beneficiaries. A few commenters stated that there are already sufficient protections in place because there are several policies in place to identify and mitigate practices related to avoiding higher risk beneficiaries.

Response: We appreciate the feedback we received in response to this comment solicitation. We will consider this information to inform future rulemaking.

c. Increasing the Amount of the Prior Savings Adjustment

Under section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act, an ACO's benchmark must be reset at the start of each agreement period using the most recent available 3 years of expenditures for Parts A and B services for beneficiaries assigned to the ACO. Section 1899(d)(1)(B)(ii) of the Act provides the Secretary with discretion to adjust the historical benchmark by “such other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate.” Under this authority, as described in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69898 through 69915), we established a prior savings adjustment that will apply when establishing the benchmark for eligible ACOs entering an agreement period beginning on January 1, 2024, or in subsequent years, to account for the average per capita amount of savings generated during the ACO's prior agreement period.

The prior savings adjustment adopted in the CY 2023 PFS final rule is designed to adjust an ACO's benchmark to account for the average per capita amount of savings generated by the ACO across the 3 performance years prior to the start of its current agreement period for re-entering and renewing ACOs. In the final rule, we explained that reinstituting a prior savings adjustment would be broadly in line with our interest in addressing dynamics to ensure sustainability of the benchmarking methodology. Specifically, such an adjustment would help to mitigate the rebasing ratchet effect on an ACO's benchmark by returning to an ACO's benchmark an amount that reflects its success in lowering growth in expenditures while meeting the program's quality performance standard in the performance years corresponding to the benchmark years for the ACO's new agreement period. We also explained our belief that a prior savings adjustment could help address an ACO's effects on expenditures in its regional service area that result in reducing the regional adjustment added to the historical benchmark.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69899), we explained that, in order to mitigate the potential for rebased benchmarks for ACOs that are lower-spending compared with their regional service area and that achieved savings in the benchmark period to become overinflated, we believed that adjusting an ACO's benchmark based on the higher of either the prior savings adjustment or the ACO's positive regional adjustment would be appropriate. In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, we also noted that we proposed to further mitigate the impacts of the negative regional adjustment when the overall adjustment to an ACO's historical benchmark is negative; however, the negative regional adjustments by enrollment type would continue to be factored in when the overall regional adjustment is positive. (Refer to 88 FR 52494, and 88 FR 52465 through 52472.)

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69914 through 69915), we finalized a policy to apply a 50 percent scaling factor to the pro-rated positive average per capita prior savings, because we believed it would be important to consider a measure of the sharing rate used in determining the shared savings payment the ACO earned in the applicable performance years under its prior agreement period(s). In response to discussion of this policy in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (87 FR 69910), ACOs and other interested parties commented that we should consider using a higher scaling factor that may more closely match the maximum shared savings rate from an ACO's prior agreement period. However, in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we reiterated our belief that a 50 percent scaling factor would be appropriate because it represents a middle ground between the maximum sharing rate of 75 percent under the ENHANCED track and the lower sharing rates available under the BASIC track (for example, 40 percent). Additionally, we noted that if we were to finalize a scaling factor that would more closely match the average shared savings rate from an ACO's prior agreement period, many ACOs would have a scaling factor below 50 percent, which would be less advantageous than the policy that we finalized (see 87 FR 69910 through 69911).

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (see 87 FR 69902), we also finalized a policy to calculate the final adjustment to the benchmark by adding the pro-rated average per capita prior savings to the ACO's negative regional adjustment for ACOs that are higher spending relative to their regional service area. Under this policy, we apply the 50 percent scaling factor after offsetting the negative regional adjustment to maximize the portion of the pro-rated average per capita savings that would be added to the negative regional adjustment in determining the final adjustment to the benchmark and strengthen incentives for ACOs to remain in the program.

MedPAC commented on the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule that while the prior savings adjustment is a reasonable policy for mitigating ratcheting effects, implementing both the prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment policies together would be duplicative. MedPAC also expressed concern that the prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment could interact in a way that would perpetuate a programmatic bias towards ACOs receiving a positive regional adjustment. In MedPAC's view, many ACOs would receive an inflated prior savings adjustment because the prior savings adjustment would be based on savings achieved using benchmarks already inflated by the regional adjustment. However, we explained in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69913) that because for most ACOs, the positive regional adjustment would exceed the prior savings adjustment, our policy of applying the larger of the regional adjustment and the prior savings adjustment potentially mitigates this concern.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52494 through 52495), we solicited comments on potential changes to the 50 percent scaling factor used in determining the prior savings adjustment. such as using an average of the ACO's shared savings rates from the 3 years prior to the start of its agreement period, increasing to 75 percent of shared savings achieved if the ACO participated in the ENHANCED track in the 3 years prior to the start of the agreement period, or another value corresponding to the maximum shared savings rate the ACO was eligible to earn in the 3 years prior to the start of the agreement period. We also solicited comments on potential changes to the positive regional adjustment to reduce the possibility of inflating the benchmark, while still mitigating potential ratchet effects on ACO benchmarks.

The following is a summary of the public comments we received in response to the comment solicitation on increasing the amount of the prior savings adjustment and our response:

Comment: In response to the RFI regarding implementing changes to the prior savings adjustment and related changes to the positive regional adjustment to mitigate potential ratchet effects on ACOs' benchmarks, the majority of comments were supportive of increasing the prior savings adjustment in at least one of the ways described in the proposed rule, with several commenters specifically recommending using the maximum shared savings rate the ACO was eligible to receive during the benchmark years. We also received several comments regarding potential changes to the positive regional adjustment to reduce the possibility of inflating ACOs' benchmarks, while still mitigating potential ratchet effects on those benchmarks. Of those, most commenters favored increasing the cap on the positive regional adjustment to provide an additional incentive to ACOs that are already efficient relative to their region. One commenter noted that beneficiaries assigned based on primary care services furnished by specialists tend to have higher costs and suggested adjusting the cap on the positive regional adjustment based on the share of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population that is assigned based on step 2 of the step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology. One commenter recommended capping the positive regional adjustment using risk adjusted regional per-capita FFS expenditures in BY3 instead of national per-capita FFS expenditures, and also suggested incorporating an offset factor for the regional adjustment for ACOs that serve an unusually high proportion of underserved beneficiaries relative to other ACOs in their region.

Two commenters, including MedPAC, were opposed to increasing the amount of the prior savings adjustment to align with the higher shared savings rate available under the ENHANCED track. MedPAC noted that using the sharing rate available under the ENHANCED track to increase the scaling factor of the prior savings adjustment would exacerbate the inflation of benchmarks due to the regional adjustment. As an alternative, MedPAC suggested that the prior savings adjustment should serve as a mechanism for phasing out the regional adjustment entirely. MedPAC also suggested that the prior savings adjustment could be scaled based on an ACO's own efficiency within its region, which would mitigate both the ratchet effect and benchmark inflation because the regional adjustment would be removed both from performance year benchmarks and the prior savings adjustment. Another commenter opined that the current 50 percent scaling factor is appropriate because it aligns with the weight used to determine positive regional adjustments for ACOs receiving a regional adjustment for their second or subsequent agreement periods.

Several commenters recommended increasing the cap on the prior savings adjustment beyond 5 percent of national per-capita FFS expenditures. Several also recommended risk adjusting the capped amount to reflect differences in the health status of ACOs' beneficiary populations. A number of commenters also recommended allowing ACOs to receive the greater of the 50 percent factor and 5 percent of national per-capita FFS expenditures, and one commenter suggested allowing ACOs to retain 75 percent of the average savings achieved by the ACO over the three benchmark years. One commenter was opposed to increasing the 5 percent cap, suggesting instead that the cap be based on a weighted average of national and risk-adjusted regional per-capita FFS expenditures as described in § 425.652(a)(5)(iv).

A few commenters recommended implementing a quartile-based benchmark system similar to Medicare Advantage, adjusting benchmarks relative to regional spending. Additionally, a few commenters suggested that ACOs transitioning from total cost of care models such as the ACO REACH Model be eligible for a prior savings adjustment based on savings achieved under those models. One commenter also suggested calculating the prior savings adjustment at the TIN level instead of the ACO level.

Response: We appreciate the feedback we received in response to this comment solicitation. We will consider this information to inform future rulemaking.

d. Expanding the ACPT Over Time and Addressing Overall Market-wide Ratchet Effects

As described in the December 2018 final rule (83 FR 68024 through 68030), we used our statutory authority under section 1899(i)(3) of the Act to adopt the policy under which we update the historical benchmark using a blend of national and regional growth rates. In accordance with § 425.601(b), for agreement periods beginning on July 1, 2019, and before January 1, 2024, we update the historical benchmark for an ACO for each performance year using a blend of national and regional growth rates between BY3 and the performance year.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69881 through 69898), we finalized a policy for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, to incorporate a prospectively projected administrative growth factor, a variant of the United States Per Capita Cost (USPCC) that we refer to as the Accountable Care Prospective Trend (ACPT), into a “three-way” blend with national and regional growth rates to update an ACO's historical benchmark for each performance year in the ACO's agreement period. The three-way blend is calculated as the weighted average of the ACPT (one-third weight) and the existing national-regional “two-way” blend (two-thirds weight). The ACPT will be projected for an ACO's entire agreement period near the start of that agreement period, providing a degree of certainty to ACOs.

We explained in the CY 2023 PFS final rule that the ACPT will insulate a portion of the annual benchmark update from any savings occurring as a result of the actions of ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program and address the impact of increasing market penetration by ACOs in a regional service area on the existing blended national-regional growth factor. Because the ACPT is prospectively set at the outset of an agreement period, any savings generated by ACOs during the agreement period would not be reflected in the ACPT component of the three-way blend. Accordingly, the incorporation of the ACPT may allow benchmarks to increase beyond actual spending growth rates as ACOs slow spending growth. By limiting ACOs' ability to slow spending growth for purposes of their own benchmarks, we noted that we believed the use of this three-way blend to update ACOs' benchmarks would incentivize greater savings by ACOs and greater program participation. Additionally, because incorporating the ACPT into the update would reduce the degree to which an ACO's savings negatively impact its benchmark through the regional trend component of the update, we also stated our belief that this change to the update methodology would help to address concerns raised by ACOs and other interested parties regarding the disproportionate impact of an ACO's savings on the benchmark update for ACOs with high market share.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we noted that it was possible that incorporating the ACPT into a three-way blended update factor would have the potential for mixed effects. For example, it might also lower an ACO's benchmark relative to the two-way blend if external factors lead to higher program spending growth than originally projected at the start of an ACO's agreement period. Consequently, we finalized that if an ACO generates losses for a performance year that meet or exceed its MLR (for two-sided model ACOs) or negative MSR (for one-sided model ACOs) under the three-way blend, we would recalculate the ACO's updated benchmark using the two-way blend and the ACO would receive whichever benchmark update minimizes shared losses. However, the ACO would not be eligible to share in savings resulting from use of the two-way blend in updating the benchmark. We also finalized that if unforeseen circumstances such as an economic recession, pandemic, or other factors cause actual expenditure trends to significantly deviate from projections, we would retain discretion to decrease the weight applied to the ACPT in the three-way blend.

In their comments on the proposal to adopt the three-way blend in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule (see 87 FR 69890), ACOs and other interested parties expressed concern that the three-way blend effectively increases the proportion of the benchmark update that is based upon national trends, as opposed to regional trends, noting that the blend may not adequately account for geographic variation in spending growth that is outside of an ACO's control. Over a 5-year agreement period, we recognize some ACOs may be disadvantaged or advantaged in the short term by benchmark updates that give greater weight to a national update factor. However, as we stated in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69891), we expect that the net impact of these deviations will be modest in the context of offsetting considerations. For example, the three-way blend only incorporates the ACPT at a one-third weight and maintains the current two-way blend for the majority weight of the benchmark trend calculation, allowing for a significant proportion of the benchmark update to reflect expenditure growth in an ACO's regional service area. The ACPT itself is also expected to project spending above realized spending as ACOs generate savings, thereby providing a stable, predictable component of the update factor that will be beneficial for ACOs.

Interested parties who commented on the proposal in the CY 2023 PFS proposed rule to incorporate the ACPT as part of a three-way blend suggested modifications to the three-way blend to further mitigate potential ratchet effects and to better reflect regional variation in spending. These included modifications such as: (1) keeping a two-way national-regional blend and substituting the national component of the two-way blend with the ACPT (see 87 FR 69890); and (2) adjusting the weight of the ACPT in the three-way blend to reflect each ACO's market penetration, as is done with the national component of the two-way blend (see 87 FR 69893). We declined to implement these suggestions in the CY 2023 PFS final rule.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52495 through 52496), we sought comment on the following potential refinements to the ACPT and the three-way blended benchmark update factor as CMS works toward broad implementation of administrative benchmarks: (1) replacing the national component of the two-way blend with the ACPT; and (2) scaling the weight given to the ACPT in a two-way blend for each ACO based on the collective market share of multiple ACOs within the ACO's regional service area.

The following is a summary of the public comments we received in response to the comment solicitation on expanding the ACPT over time and addressing overall market-wide ratchet effects, and our response:

Comment: Many commenters supported replacing the national component of the two-way blend with the ACPT over use of the three-way blend finalized in the PY 2023 PFS final rule. MedPAC also supported the concept of scaling the weight given to the ACPT in a two-way blend for each ACO based on the collective market share of multiple ACOs within the ACO's regional service area. However, MedPAC also expressed a preference for phasing out the regional component of the update factor in favor of an administrative growth factor. Another commenter also supported scaling the weight of the ACPT in a blended update factor based on each ACO's market share, but only above a minimum threshold for market share.

Several commenters were opposed to moving to a two-way blended update factor with the ACPT replacing the national component of the current two-way blend and favored keeping the three-way blend as finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule. Recommendations from these commenters included: (a) focusing on the longer-term goal of moving to an administrative benchmark; (b) providing additional details on how the three-way blend will be operationalized before making any changes; and (c) evaluating the impact of the three-way blend before making changes. A few commenters were also opposed to scaling the weight given to the ACPT in a two-way blend for each ACO based on the collective market share of multiple ACOs within the ACO's regional service area.

Several commenters recommended that CMS remove an ACO's assigned beneficiaries from the assignable population for the region when calculating the update factor (the commenter did not specify if they were referencing the two-way or three-way blended update factor). Most of these commenters were also supportive of substituting the ACPT for the national component of the two-way blend, but commenters varied on whether removing assigned beneficiaries from the assignable population should be done in conjunction with, or as an alternative to, that approach.

Several commenters favored calculating a two-way blended and three-way blended update factor for each ACO and using the more advantageous factor when updating the benchmark in each performance year. Some of these commenters favored using the national and regional two-way blend, while others preferred an updated two-way blend including the ACPT in place of the national component.

A number of commenters were concerned that the 5-year projection used in the ACPT, as finalized in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, would potentially be less accurate in later years of an ACO's agreement period and recommended only projecting the ACPT out for 3 years instead of 5. A few commenters also expressed general support for a longer-term move toward administrative benchmarks to address the ratchet effect experienced by renewing ACOs.

Response: We appreciate the feedback we received in response to this comment solicitation. We will consider this information to inform future rulemaking.

e. Promoting ACO and CBO Collaboration

Section 1899(b)(2)(G) of the Act requires an ACO participating in the Shared Savings Program to define processes to promote evidence-based medicine and patient engagement, report on quality and cost measures, and coordinate care, such as through the use of telehealth, remote patient monitoring, and other enabling technologies. In the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67827), we finalized policies to require that a participating Shared Savings Program ACO provide documentation in its application describing its plans to: (1) promote evidence-based medicine; (2) promote beneficiary engagement; (3) report internally on quality and cost metrics; and (4) coordinate care. We emphasized our belief that ACOs should retain the flexibility to establish processes that are best suited to their practice and patient population. As part of these required processes, we explained that ACOs should adopt a focus on patient-centeredness, which could include such activities as: a process for evaluating the needs of the ACO's population, including consideration of diversity in its patient populations, and a plan to address the needs of this population, including how the ACO intends to partner with other interested parties in the community to improve the health of its population; a plan to engage in shared decision-making with beneficiaries; and a plan to implement individualized care plans, including taking into account the community resources available to the individual beneficiary.

When establishing these required processes and patient centeredness criteria in the November 2011 final rule (76 FR 67826), we stated that as we learn more about successful strategies in these areas, and as we gain more experience assessing specific critical elements for success, the Shared Savings Program eligibility requirements under section 1899(b)(2)(G) of the Act may be revised. For example, in subsequent rules we underscored the importance of health information technology development and infrastructure within care coordination. In the June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32725), we finalized two modifications to the care coordination processes required of ACOs under § 425.112(b)(4): (1) adding a new eligibility requirement under § 425.112(b)(4)(ii)(C), which required an ACO to describe in its application how it will encourage and promote the use of enabling technologies for improving care coordination for beneficiaries, and (2) adding a new provision at § 425.112(b)(4)(ii)(D), which required the applicant to describe how the ACO intends to partner with long-term and post-acute care providers to improve care coordination for the ACO's assigned beneficiaries. In the CY 2018 PFS final rule (82 FR 53222), we shifted from requiring an ACO to submit documents detailing how it would meet the requirements of § 425.112 as a narrative in its Shared Savings Program application to instead requiring it to certify at the time of application that it has defined the required processes and patient centeredness criteria consistent with the requirements specified in § 425.112 and to furnish such documentation upon request—thereby reducing ACO burden while maintaining CMS's flexibility to obtain additional documentation when necessary (see § 425.204(c)(ii)).

Additionally, in our June 2015 final rule (80 FR 32722), we specified that the care coordination processes under § 425.112 could include coordination with CBOs that provide services that address social determinants of health. This coordination could include a plan to partner with interested parties in the community, a plan to engage in shared decision making with beneficiaries, and a plan to implement individualized care plans. In that rulemaking (80 FR 32722 and 32723), we also confirmed our understanding that ACOs differ in their ability to adopt the appropriate health information exchange technologies, but we continued to underscore the importance of robust health information exchange tools in effective care coordination.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52496 through 52497), we solicited comments on ways to improve and incentivize collaboration between ACOs and interested parties in the community or CBOs. As explained in the CY 2023 PFS final rule (87 FR 69790), where we refer to CBOs, we mean public or private not-for-profit entities that provide specific services to the community or targeted populations in the community to address the health and social needs of those populations. They may include community-action agencies, housing agencies, area agencies on aging, or other non-profits that apply for grants to perform social services. They may receive grants from other agencies in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, including Federal grants administered by the Administration for Children and Families (ACF), Administration for Community Living (ACL), or the Centers for Disease Control, or from State-funded grants to provide social services. Generally, we believe such organizations are trusted entities that know the populations they serve and their communities, want to be engaged, and may have the infrastructure or systems in place to help coordinate supportive services that address social determinants of health or serve as a trusted source to share information. 309 We recognize that ACOs wishing to address social needs may want to make investments in goods or social services that would enable their ACO participants and ACO providers/suppliers to work with CBOs that have expertise in identifying and providing the types of social services that the ACO's beneficiary population requires.

309 U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response, Community-Based Organizations during COVID-19, available at https://www.phe.gov/emergency/events/COVID19/atrisk/returning-to-work/Pages/default.aspx .

It is important to note that the Shared Savings Program does not prohibit ACOs from partnering with CBOs. Currently, if a CBO is enrolled in Medicare, it may already be an ACO participant or an ACO provider/supplier. We believe CBOs could play an important role in identifying and addressing gaps in health equity. As we stated in the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we hope to encourage more ACOs to partner with CBOs whether they provide items and services reimbursed by Medicare or not. We recognized, however, that Federal and other sources of grant funding for social services may be insufficient to fully address the demand for services within a community or broader geography. As we noted in that final rule, contractual arrangements between the health care sector and CBOs providing social services have increased in recent years to meet this demand.

In the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52496 through 52497), we solicited comments on approaches, generally, for encouraging or incentivizing increased collaboration between ACOs and CBOs, including any policies specifically designed to encourage ACOs to partner with CBOs and address unmet health-related social needs. We also solicited comments on potential changes CMS could make to the patient-centered care requirements in § 425.112 to strengthen partnerships between ACOs and interested parties in the community, including CBOs, to address unmet health-related social needs.

The following is a summary of the public comments we received in response to the comment solicitation on promoting ACO and CBO collaboration, and our response:

Comment: Commenters generally supported increasing collaboration between ACOs and CBOs. Commenters noted that they appreciate the opportunity to highlight ways ACOs could increase collaboration with CBOs and strengthen partnerships between ACOs and interested parties in the community to address health equity and SDOH. Commenters stated that some ACOs are actively working with community partners to address SDOH and are working to close the loop between referrals to social services and follow-up interventions.

Several commenters encouraged CMS to consider increased financial support to sustain ACO-CBO collaboration. The commenters stated that many CBOs are underfunded and lack connections to the health care system or the ability to share data effectively. Some commenters stated that they use shared savings to support partnerships with CBOs, but that more stable and predictable funding mechanisms that would support the long-term collaboration needed to improve care for beneficiaries may be needed. Some commenters suggested that CMS consider new and innovative payment methods for encouraging relationships between ACOs and CBOs, including advance payments to ACOs that agree to invest in CBO capacity to align with ACO providers to deliver targeted interventions to priority populations or a capitated payment methodology that would better support the capacity of CBOs, including systems and other infrastructure they can use to improve coordination of care.

Commenters shared further suggestions with CMS (listed below) and stressed the need for non-financial support in increasing ACO-CBO collaborations.

• Commenters encouraged CMS to provide additional “technical assistance,” as well as additional program guidance and resources to ACOs that they can use when establishing or expanding partnerships with CBOs in the community.

• Commenters encouraged CMS to conduct outreach and provide support to CBOs that may be interested in collaborating with ACOs.

• Commenters suggested that CMS expand payment mechanisms using a similar approach embedded in the Maryland Total Cost of Care (TCOC) Model for supporting collaboration with CBOs.

• Commenters suggested that CMS add an ACO quality measure to assess the percentage of the ACO population screened for health-related social needs, and the percentage of the population that had an intervention delivered by a CBO.

• Commenters suggested that CMS improve SDOH data collection and expand and refine the use of payment methodologies that appropriately address the health, social, and equity goals of the community.

Several commenters recommended changes to the Shared Savings Program's financial methodology to support ACO collaboration with CBOs. Specifically, they noted that increasing the financial benchmark to reflect assigned beneficiaries with social risk factors would provide resources for ACOs to develop robust community partnerships and allow flexibility for ACOs to provide supplemental benefits to those beneficiaries. Other commenters recommended that CMS leverage technology by providing ACOs with quality data reported via MIPS for purposes of identifying beneficiaries who have been screened for SDOH. One commenter encouraged CMS to consider a “tiered level of ACO participation” in the Shared Savings Program based on the degree to which the ACO collaborates with CBOs and integrates them into its governance structure and/or its ACO participant/ACO provider/supplier structure.

In addition to the suggestions for increasing and incentivizing ACO-CBO collaboration as summarized above, commenters also shared a few potential program risks from advancing ACO-CBO collaboration. Commenters expressed concern regarding the capacity of CBOs to furnish care and shared that increasing collaboration between ACOs and CBOs would also increase referrals to the CBO, possibly straining the CBO's resources and increasing the demand on those resources. However, a few commenters noted that CMS could better evaluate the needs of communities to assist ACOs in meeting those needs. Lastly, commenters cautioned against any new regulations intended to increase ACO-CBO collaboration, noting that ACOs would benefit from the continued flexibility to form relationships that best meet the ACO's goals and the needs of the beneficiaries that they serve.

Response: We thank commenters for their suggestions and appreciate the feedback we received for this solicitation. We will consider this information in future rulemaking.

f. Out of Scope Comments

The following is a summary of the public comments that we received that went beyond the scope of the four RFIs in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule (88 FR 52492 through 52497) and our response.

Comment: A few commenters requested certain waivers of Medicare requirements for Shared Savings Program ACOs. One commenter requested that CMS allow wider use of telehealth by allowing all Shared Savings Program ACOs access to telehealth waivers, and expand what telehealth waivers cover (for example, to include patient cost-sharing, modalities, and covered services). Another commenter asked CMS to “waive the initiating face-to-face relationship requirement for the proposed and existing care management codes for partner organizations that have been designated by an ACO that accepts downside risk.” This commenter also requested that ACOs be able to waive beneficiary co-pays and cost sharing requirements. One commenter requested that CMS change the “eligibility requirements for beneficiaries for the Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF) 3-Day Rule Waiver which currently precludes the beneficiary from residing in a SNF or other long term care setting.” Another commenter encouraged CMS to allow SNFs to be added to the ACO's SNF Affiliate List on a quarterly basis as well as “reconsider the timing and star rating criteria so SNFs have an opportunity to correct” their processes following an “incident” that reduced their star rating to ensure that the SNF would have an opportunity to attain their minimum star rating status in time for the following Shared Savings Program performance year. Other commenters suggested modifications to the Shared Savings Program's financial methodology unrelated to the RFIs or proposals in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule, such as:

• Eliminating the distinction between low revenue ACOs and high revenue ACOs (refer to the definitions of “High revenue ACO” and “Low revenue ACO” at § 425.20);

• Setting regional-only benchmarks;

• Making equity adjustments in financial benchmarking;

• Removing the ACO's own assigned beneficiaries from regional expenditure calculations when adjusting and updating the ACO's benchmark;

• Retroactively applying the policy described at § 425.605(h) (Calculation of shared savings for certain BASIC track ACOs not meeting MSR requirement) to expand opportunities for certain ACOs to share in savings so that it will apply to PY 2023 and all prior years.

• Developing a pediatric risk algorithm; and

• Developing “value-based arrangements” (such as a nested bundled payment for skilled nursing facility, home health, or palliative care/serious illness management services) that “are embedded within the ACO for non-physician participating providers or organizations.”

Another commenter suggested CMS provide “projected or year-to-date shared savings levels that include a single dollar amount without requiring template population.” The commenter also requested that CMS allow an ACO to exclude a beneficiary from the ACO's assigned beneficiary population if the beneficiary declines data sharing. One commenter requested that CMS require ACOs to include geriatric expertise on their governing bodies or incentivize health systems to become “Age-Friendly Health Systems.”

Response: We appreciate the commenters' input but note that these suggestions go beyond the scope of the RFIs in the CY 2024 PFS proposed rule.

(2) Provisions for the Medicare Clinical Quality Measure for Accountable Care Organizations Participating in the Medicare Shared Savings Program

As discussed in the proposed rule (88 FR 52420-3), we proposed to establish the Medicare Clinical Quality Measure for Accountable Care Organizations Participating in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Medicare CQM) collection type in the APP measure set. The Medicare CQM collection type will be available to only ACOs participating in the Shared Savings Program. ACOs in the Shared Savings Program will have the option to report the Medicare CQM under the APP on only “beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20”, instead of their all payer/all patient population, beginning with the 2024 performance year (88 FR 52420). The Medicare CQM also will serve as another collection type in addition to the existing eCQM/MIPS CQM option, which is an all payer/all patient collection type under the APP.

In the CY 2023 PFS final rule, we stated that we will monitor the impact of policies such as the sunsetting of the CMS Web Interface in the 2024 performance year and the requirement to report all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs beginning in the 2025 performance year (87 FR 69833). We also stated that we may revisit these and related issues in future rulemaking based on lessons learned as we gain more experience with ACOs reporting eCQMs/MIPS CQMs (87 FR 69833). In the proposed rule, we reiterated that we are committed to supporting ACOs in the transition to all payer/all patient eCQMs/MIPS CQMs and in the transition to digital quality measurement reporting (88 FR 52420-3). We encouraged readers to review additional background on our proposal to include the Medicare CQM collection type in the APP measure set (88 FR 52420-3). Similarly, we now refer readers to section III.G.2.b.(2) of this final rule for additional context on finalizing this proposal.

The following is a summary of the comments we received on this proposal as outlined in this section and our responses. Related comments and responses may be found in section III.G.2.b.(2) of this final rule.

Comment: We received one comment supporting the proposal to establish the Medicare CQM collection type in the APP measure set as described in this section.

Response: We thank the commenter for their support.

Comment: Some commenters expressed confusion about our reference in the proposed rule to “attributed Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries who meet the definition of a `beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQM(s)'” (88 FR 52562). In particular, commenters were concerned that our use of the word “attributed” may indicate a different beneficiary population for the Medicare CQM collection type than the population referenced elsewhere in the proposed rule (88 FR 52420).

Response: We agree that our use of the word “attributed” may have been confusing. We now clarify that our proposal to establish the Medicare CQM collection type in the APP measure set is intended to reference the same beneficiary population as that discussed in the Shared Savings Program section of the proposed rule (88 FR 52420), specifically beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20. For more discussion on this matter, please refer to section III.G.2.b.(2) of this final rule.

After consideration of public comments, we are finalizing as proposed to include the Medicare CQM collection type in the APP measure set beginning with the 2024 performance year.

3. ICRs Regarding the Medicare Shared Savings Program

Section 1899(e) of the Act provides that chapter 35 of title 44 of the U.S.C., which includes such provisions as the PRA, shall not apply to the Shared Savings Program. Accordingly, we are not setting out Shared Savings Program burden estimates under this section of the preamble. Please refer to section VI.E.10. of this final rule for a discussion of the impacts associated with the changes to the Shared Savings Program as described in section III.G. of this final rule.

d. Medicare Shared Savings Program

In section III.G. of this final rule, we are finalizing modifications to the Shared Savings Program to further advance Medicare's overall value-based care strategy of growth, alignment, and equity, and to respond to concerns raised by ACOs and other interested parties. The changes to the Shared Savings Program include the following: modifications to the quality performance standard and reporting requirements under the APP that would continue to move ACOs toward digital measurement of quality and to align with the Quality Payment Program; modifications to the step-wise beneficiary assignment methodology to add a new third step and related changes to how we identify the assignable beneficiary population; updates to the definition of primary care services used for purposes of beneficiary assignment to remain consistent with billing and coding guidelines; refinements to the financial benchmarking methodology for ACOs in agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years to (1) cap the risk score growth in an ACO's regional service area when calculating regional trends used to update the historical benchmark at the time of financial reconciliation for symmetry with the cap on ACO risk score growth, (2) apply the same CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology applicable to the calendar year corresponding to the performance year in calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for each benchmark year, (3) further mitigate the impact of the negative regional adjustment on the benchmark to encourage participation by ACOs caring for medically complex, high cost beneficiaries, and (4) specify the circumstances in which CMS would recalculate the prior savings adjustment for changes in values used in benchmark calculations due to compliance action taken to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries, or as a result of the issuance of a revised initial determination of financial performance for a previous performance year following a reopening of ACO shared savings and shared losses calculations; refine newly established AIP policies; make updates to other programmatic areas including the program's eligibility requirements; and make timely technical changes to the regulations for clarity and consistency.

10. Medicare Shared Savings Program

1. Medicare Shared Savings Program Provisions

As noted previously in this final rule, the cap on an ACO's regional service area risk score growth is expected to increase the incentive for ACOs to participate in regions with high risk score growth, improving the incentive for ACOs to join and/or sustain participation when serving regions with increasingly medically complex beneficiaries. Similarly, the use of a uniform approach to calculating both BY and PY prospective HCC risk scores using the same CMS-HCC risk adjustment model(s) is anticipated to increase participation (and reduce the potential for attrition) particularly from ACOs serving greater proportions of complex beneficiaries exhibiting high risk scores. Mitigating the impact of the negative regional adjustments on benchmarks is expected to increase participation from ACOs serving up to 500,000 new assigned beneficiaries per year. The revised definition of assignable beneficiary is expected to allow more than 760,000 additional beneficiaries to be included in the population of assignable beneficiaries, many of whom would be eligible to be assigned to ACOs. Taken together, these provisions are expected to increase participation in the Shared Savings Program over the 2024-2033 period by roughly 10 to 20 percent.

ACOs have been found to perform better on certain patient-experience and performance measures than physician groups participating in the MIPS. In addition, ACOs continued to achieve better average performance rates than comparably sized MIPS group practices on all 10 of the CMS WI measures and had higher scores on the CAHPS for MIPS patient experience survey in PY 2022. ACO performance was statistically better on 6 out of 10 CMS WI measures compared to comparably sized MIPS group practice reporters in PY 2022. Those measures include diabetes control, blood pressure control, breast cancer screening, colorectal cancer screening, depression screening and follow-up, and tobacco screening and cessation intervention.

Increased participation in the Shared Savings Program will extend ACO care coordination and quality improvement to segments of the beneficiary population that potentially have more to benefit from care management.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

85. The authority citation for part 425 continues to read as follows:

Authority: 42 U.S.C. 1302, 1306, 1395hh, and 1395jjj.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

86. Section 425.20 is amended—

a. By revising the definitions of “Assignable beneficiary” and “Assignment window”;

b. In the definition of “At-risk beneficiary” by—

i. Removing the periods at the end of paragraphs (5) and (6), and adding in their places semicolons; and

ii. Revising paragraph (7);

c. By adding the definitions of “Beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs” and “Expanded window for assignment” in alphabetical order;

d. In the definition of “Experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” by revising paragraph (2);

e. In the definition of “Inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives” by revising paragraph (2);

f. In the definition of “Rural health center” by—

i. Removing the word “center” and adding in its place the word “clinic”; and

ii. Removing the phrase “under § 405.2401(b)” and adding in its place the phrase “under § 405.2401(b) of this chapter”.

The revisions and additions read as follows:

§ 425.20 Definitions.

Assignable beneficiary means a Medicare fee-for-service beneficiary who receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 12-month assignment window from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c). For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, a Medicare fee-for-service beneficiary who does not meet this requirement but who meets both of the following criteria will also be considered an assignable beneficiary—

(1) Receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 24-month expanded window for assignment from a Medicare-enrolled physician who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c).

(2) Receives at least one primary care service with a date of service during a specified 12-month assignment window from a Medicare-enrolled practitioner who is one of the following:

(i) A physician assistant (as defined at § 410.74(a)(2) of this chapter).

(ii) A nurse practitioner (as defined at § 410.75(b) of this chapter).

(iii) A clinical nurse specialist (as defined at § 410.76(b) of this chapter).

Assignment window means the 12-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO, or to identify assignable beneficiaries, or both.

At-risk beneficiary * * *

(7) Is entitled to Medicare because of disability; or

Beneficiary eligible for Medicare CQMs means a beneficiary identified for purposes of reporting Medicare CQMs for ACOs participating in the Medicare Shared Savings Program (Medicare CQMs), who is either of the following:

(1) A Medicare fee-for-service beneficiary (as defined at § 425.20) who -

(i) Meets the criteria for a beneficiary to be assigned to an ACO described at § 425.401(a); and

(ii) Had at least one claim with a date of service during the measurement period from an ACO professional who is a primary care physician or who has one of the specialty designations included in § 425.402(c), or who is a physician assistant, nurse practitioner, or clinical nurse specialist.

(2) A Medicare fee-for-service beneficiary who is assigned to an ACO in accordance with § 425.402(e) because the beneficiary designated an ACO professional participating in an ACO as responsible for coordinating their overall care.

Expanded window for assignment means the 24-month period used to assign beneficiaries to an ACO, or to identify assignable beneficiaries, or both that includes the applicable 12-month assignment window and the preceding 12 months.

Experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives * * *

(2) Forty percent or more of the ACO's ACO participants participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative, or in an ACO that deferred its entry into a second Shared Savings Program agreement period under a two-sided model under § 425.200(e), in any of the 5 most recent performance years. An ACO participant is considered to have participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if the ACO participant TIN was or will be included in financial reconciliation for one or more performance years under such initiative during any of the 5 most recent performance years.

Inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives * * *

(2) Less than 40 percent of the ACO's ACO participants participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative, or in an ACO that deferred its entry into a second Shared Savings Program agreement period under a two-sided model under § 425.200(e), in each of the 5 most recent performance years. An ACO participant is considered to have participated in a performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiative if the ACO participant TIN was or will be included in financial reconciliation for one or more performance years under such initiative during any of the 5 most recent performance years.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

87. Section 425.106 is amended by revising paragraph (c)(5) to read as follows:

§ 425.106 Shared governance.

(c) * * *

(5)(i) In cases in which the composition of the ACO's governing body does not meet the requirements of paragraph (c)(2) of this section, the ACO must describe why it seeks to differ from these requirements and how the ACO will provide meaningful representation in ACO governance by Medicare beneficiaries.

(ii) For agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, in cases in which the composition of the ACO's governing body does not meet the requirements of paragraph (c)(3) of this section, the ACO must describe why it seeks to differ from these requirements and how the ACO will involve ACO participants in innovative ways in ACO governance.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

88. Section 425.204 is amended by—

a. In paragraph (c)(3)(ii), by removing the reference “(c)(2)” and adding in its place the reference “§ 425.106(c)(2)”; and

b. Revising paragraph (c)(3)(iii).

The revision reads as follows:

§ 425.204 Content of the application.

(c) * * *

(3) * * *

(iii) If seeking an exception to the requirement at § 425.106(c)(3), for agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, why the ACO is unable to meet the requirement and how it will involve ACO participants in innovative ways in ACO governance.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

89. Section 425.302 is amended by revising paragraph (a)(3)(iii) to read as follows:

§ 425.302 Program requirements for data submission and certifications.

(a) * * *

(3) * * *

(iii) For performance years starting on January 1, 2019 through 2024, the percentage of eligible clinicians participating in the ACO that use CEHRT to document and communicate clinical care to their patients or other health care providers meets or exceeds the applicable percentage specified by CMS at § 425.506(f).

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

90. Section 425.308 is amended by adding paragraph (b)(9) to read as follows:

§ 425.308 Public reporting and transparency.

(b) * * *

(9) For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, the total number of ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and ACO professionals that are MIPS eligible clinicians, Qualifying APM Participants (QPs), or Partial Qualifying APM Participants (Partial QPs) (each as defined at § 414.1305 of this chapter) that earn a MIPS performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category as set forth in § 425.507 that is comprised of the following—

(i) The number of ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and ACO professionals that meet the requirements of § 425.507(a) and are not excluded under § 425.507(b) for the applicable performance year; and

(ii) The number of ACO participants, ACO providers/suppliers, and ACO professionals that are excluded under § 425.507(b) that voluntarily reported and received a MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category score for the applicable performance year.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

91. Section 425.316 is amended by revising paragraphs (e)(2) introductory text and (e)(2)(i) to read as follows:

§ 425.316 Monitoring of ACOs.

(e) * * *

(2) If CMS determines that an ACO participating in advance investment payments became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives during its first or second performance year of its agreement period or that the ACO became a high revenue ACO during any performance year of its agreement period, CMS—

(i) Will cease payment of advance investment payments no later than the quarter after the ACO became experienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives or became a high revenue ACO.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

92. Section 425.400 is amended—

a. By revising paragraph (a)(2)(ii);

b. In paragraph (a)(3)(i), by removing the phrase “most recent 12 months” and adding in its place the phrase “most recent 12 or 24 months, as applicable,”;

c. By revising paragraph (c)(1)(vii) introductory text;

d. By adding paragraph (c)(1)(viii); and

e. By revising paragraphs (c)(2)(i) introductory text and (c)(2)(ii).

The revisions and addition read as follows:

§ 425.400 General.

(a) * * *

(2) * * *

(ii) Assignment will be updated quarterly based on the most recent 12 or 24 months of data, as applicable, under the methodology described in §§ 425.402 and 425.404.

(c) * * *

(1) * * *

(vii) For the performance year starting on January 1, 2023 as follows:

(viii) For the performance year starting on January 1, 2024, and subsequent performance years as follows:

(A) CPT codes:

( 1 ) 96160 and 96161 (codes for administration of health risk assessment).

( 2 ) 96202 and 96203 (codes for caregiver behavior management training).

( 3 ) 97550, 97551, and 97552 (codes for caregiver training services).

( 4 ) 99201 through 99215 (codes for office or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of a patient).

( 5 ) 99304 through 99318 (codes for professional services furnished in a nursing facility; professional services or services reported on an FQHC or RHC claim identified by these codes are excluded when furnished in a SNF).

( 6 ) 99319 through 99340 (codes for patient domiciliary, rest home, or custodial care visit).

( 7 ) 99341 through 99350 (codes for evaluation and management services furnished in a patient's home).

( 8 ) 99354 and 99355 (add-on codes, for prolonged evaluation and management or psychotherapy services beyond the typical service time of the primary procedure; when the base code is also a primary care service code under this paragraph (c)(1)(viii)).

( 9 ) 99406 and 99407 (codes for smoking and tobacco-use cessation counseling services).

( 10 ) 99421, 99422, and 99423 (codes for online digital evaluation and management).

( 11 ) 99424, 99425, 99426, and 99427 (codes for principal care management services).

( 12 ) 99437, 99487, 99489, 99490 and 99491 (codes for chronic care management).

( 13 ) 99439 (code for non-complex chronic care management).

( 14 ) 99483 (code for assessment of and care planning for patients with cognitive impairment).

( 15 ) 99484, 99492, 99493 and 99494 (codes for behavioral health integration services).

( 16 ) 99495 and 99496 (codes for transitional care management services).

( 17 ) 99497 and 99498 (codes for advance care planning; services identified by these codes furnished in an inpatient setting are excluded).

(B) HCPCS codes:

( 1 ) G0019 and G0022 (codes for community health integration services).

( 2 ) G0023 and G0024 (codes for principal illness navigation services).

( 3 ) G0101 (code for cervical or vaginal cancer screening).

( 4 ) G0136 (code for social determinants of health risk assessment services).

( 5 ) G0317, G0318, and G2212 (codes for prolonged office or other outpatient visit for the evaluation and management of a patient).

( 6 ) G0402 (code for the Welcome to Medicare visit).

( 7 ) G0438 and G0439 (codes for the annual wellness visits).

( 8 ) G0442 (code for alcohol misuse screening service).

( 9 ) G0443 (code for alcohol misuse counseling service).

( 10 ) G0444 (code for annual depression screening service).

( 11 ) G0463 (code for services furnished in ETA hospitals).

( 12 ) G0506 (code for chronic care management).

( 13 ) G2010 (code for the remote evaluation of patient video/images).

( 14 ) G2012 and G2252 (codes for virtual check-in).

( 15 ) G2058 (code for non-complex chronic care management).

( 16 ) G2064 and G2065 (codes for principal care management services).

( 17 ) G2086, G2087, and G2088 (codes for office-based opioid use disorder services).

( 18 ) G2211 (code for visit complexity inherent to evaluation and management services add-on).

( 19 ) G2214 (code for psychiatric collaborative care model).

( 20 ) G3002 and G3003 (codes for chronic pain management).

(C) Primary care service codes include any CPT code identified by CMS that directly replaces a CPT code specified in paragraph (c)(1)(viii)(A) of this section or a HCPCS code specified in paragraph (c)(1)(viii)(B) of this section, when the assignment window (as defined in § 425.20) for a benchmark or performance year includes any day on or after the effective date of the replacement code for payment purposes under FFS Medicare.

(2) * * *

(i) Except as otherwise specified in paragraph (c)(2)(i)(A)( 2 ) of this section, when the assignment window or applicable expanded window for assignment (as defined in § 425.20) for a benchmark or performance year includes any month(s) during the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency defined in § 400.200 of this chapter, in determining beneficiary assignment, we use the primary care service codes identified in paragraph (c)(1) of this section, and additional primary care service codes as follows:

(ii) Except as otherwise specified in paragraph (c)(2)(i)(A)( 2 ) of this section, the additional primary care service codes specified in paragraph (c)(2)(i) of this section are applicable to all months of the assignment window or applicable expanded window for assignment (as defined in § 425.20), when the assignment window or applicable expanded window for assignment includes any month(s) during the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency defined in § 400.200 of this chapter.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

93. Section 425.402 is amended—

a. By revising paragraph (b)(1);

b. By adding paragraph (b)(5);

c. By revising paragraph (c) introductory text; and

d. In paragraph (e)(2)(ii)(A), by removing the reference “§ 425.400(a)(4)(ii)” and adding in its place the reference “§ 425.226(a)(1)”.

The revisions and addition read as follows:

§ 425.402 Basic assignment methodology.

(b) * * *

(1) Identify all beneficiaries that had at least one primary care service during the applicable assignment window with a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO and who is a primary care physician as defined under § 425.20 or who has one of the primary specialty designations included in paragraph (c) of this section.

(5) For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years, CMS employs the following third step to assign Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries who were not identified by the criterion specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section:

(i) Identify all beneficiaries who had at least one primary care service with a non-physician ACO professional in the ACO during the applicable assignment window.

(ii) For the beneficiaries identified in paragraph (b)(5)(i) of this section, identify those beneficiaries that had at least one primary care service with a physician who is an ACO professional in the ACO and who is a primary care physician as defined under § 425.20 or who has one of the primary specialty designations included in paragraph (c) of this section during the applicable expanded window for assignment.

(iii) Identify all primary care services furnished to beneficiaries identified in paragraph (b)(5)(ii) of this section by ACO professionals in the ACO who are primary care physicians as defined under § 425.20, non-physician ACO professionals, and physicians with specialty designations included in paragraph (c) of this section during the applicable expanded window for assignment.

(iv) A beneficiary identified in paragraph (b)(5)(ii) of this section is assigned to the ACO if the allowed charges for primary care services furnished to the beneficiary by ACO professionals in the ACO who are primary care physicians, physicians with specialty designations included in paragraph (c) of this section, or non-physician ACO professionals during the applicable expanded window for assignment are greater than the allowed charges for primary care services furnished by primary care physicians, physicians with specialty designations as specified in paragraph (c) of this section, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and clinical nurse specialists who are—

(A) ACO professionals in any other ACO; or

(B) Not affiliated with any ACO and identified by a Medicare-enrolled billing TIN.

(c) ACO professionals considered in the second and third step of the assignment methodology in paragraphs (b)(4) and (5) of this section include physicians who have one of the following primary specialty designations:

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

94. Section 425.506 is amended by revising paragraph (f) introductory text to read as follows:

§ 425.506 Incorporating reporting requirements related to adoption of certified electronic health record technology.

(f) For performance years starting on January 1, 2019 through 2024, ACOs in a track that—

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

95. Section 425.507 is added to subpart F to read as follows:

§ 425.507 Incorporating Promoting Interoperability requirements related to the Quality Payment Program for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2025.

(a) For performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2025, unless otherwise excluded under paragraph (b) of this section, an ACO participant, ACO provider/supplier, and ACO professional that is a MIPS eligible clinician, Qualifying APM Participant (QP), or Partial Qualifying APM Participant (Partial QP) (each as defined at § 414.1305 of this chapter) must satisfy all of the following:

(1) Report the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category measures and requirements to MIPS according to 42 CFR part 414 subpart O at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level.

(2) Earn a performance category score for the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category at the individual, group, virtual group, or APM entity level.

(b) An ACO participant, ACO provider/supplier, or ACO professional is excluded from the requirements specified in paragraph (a) of this section in accordance with applicable policies that exclude or otherwise exempt eligible clinicians from reporting the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category as set forth in 42 CFR part 414 subpart O, provided however, that an ACO participant, ACO provider/supplier, or ACO professional cannot be excluded from the requirements specified in paragraph (a) solely on the basis of being a QP or Partial QP. Applicable exclusions may include:

(1) Low volume threshold as set forth at § 414.1310(b)(1)(iii) of this chapter.

(2) Eligible clinician as defined at § 414.1305 of this chapter who is not a MIPS eligible clinician as set forth in § 414.1310(b)(2) of this chapter.

(3) Reweighting of the MIPS Promoting Interoperability performance category to zero percent of the final score in accordance with applicable policies set forth at § 414.1380(c)(2) of this chapter.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

96. Section 425.512 is amended—

a. By revising paragraph (a)(2);

b. In paragraph (a)(5)(i) introductory text, by removing the phrase “paragraph (a)(2) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(7) of this section”;

c. By revising paragraphs (a)(5)(i)(A)( 2 ), (a)(5)(iii)(A) and (B);

d. By adding paragraph (a)(7);

e. In paragraph (b)(1)—

i. By adding a new first sentence;

ii. By removing the reference “paragraph (b)(2)” and adding in its place the reference “paragraph (b)(3)”;

f. By redesignating paragraphs (b)(2) and (3) as paragraphs (b)(3) and (4), respectively;

g. By adding new paragraph (b)(2);

h. By revising the newly redesignated paragraph (b)(3)(ii)(B);

i. In newly redesignated paragraph (b)(3)(iii), by removing the phrase “paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section”;

j. By revising newly redesignated paragraph (b)(3)(iv)(A);

k. In newly redesignated paragraph (b)(3)(iv)(B), by removing the phrase “paragraph (b)(2)(iv)(A) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (b)(3)(iv)(A) of this section”;

l. In newly redesignated paragraph (b)(3)(v)—

i. By removing the phrase “paragraph (b)(2)(iv)(B) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (b)(3)(iv)(B) of this section”;

ii. By removing the phrase “paragraph (b)(2)(iii) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (b)(3)(iii) of this section”;

iii. By removing the phrase “paragraph (b)(2)(iv) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (b)(3)(iv) of this section”;

m. In newly redesignated paragraph (b)(4) introductory text, by removing the phrase “paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(3) of this section”;

n. By revising newly redesignated paragraph (b)(4)(i); and

o. By revising paragraph (c)(3).

The revisions and additions read as follows:

§ 425.512 Determining the ACO quality performance standard for performance years beginning on or after January 1, 2021.

(a) * * *

(2) For the first performance year of an ACO's first agreement period under the Shared Savings Program, the ACO will meet the quality performance standard if it meets the requirements under this paragraph (a)(2).

(i) For performance years 2022 and 2023. If the ACO reports data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter and the case minimum requirement at § 414.1380 of this subchapter on the ten CMS Web Interface measures or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and the CAHPS for MIPS survey, for the applicable performance year.

(ii) For performance year 2024. If the ACO reports data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter on the ten CMS Web Interface measures or the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, and the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter), and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, for the applicable performance year.

(iii) For performance year 2025 and subsequent performance years. If the ACO reports data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter on the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, and the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter), and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, for the applicable performance year.

(5) * * *

(i) * * *

(A) * * *

( 2 ) If the ACO reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs, and achieving a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 10th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the four outcome measures in the APP measure set and a quality performance score equivalent to or higher than the 40th percentile of the performance benchmark on at least one of the remaining five measures in the APP measure set.

(iii) * * *

(A) For performance year 2024, the ACO does not report any of the ten CMS Web Interface measures, any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter) under the APP.

(B) For performance year 2025 and subsequent years, the ACO does not report any of the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs and does not administer a CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter) under the APP.

(7) For performance years 2024 and subsequent performance years, if an ACO reports all of the required measures, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter for each measure in the APP measure set and receiving a MIPS Quality performance category score as described at § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year when the ACO meets either of the following:

(i) The ACO's total available measure achievement points used to calculate the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score is reduced under § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(A) of this subchapter.

(ii) At least one of the eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs does not have a benchmark as described at § 414.1380(b)(1)(i)(A) of this subchapter.

(b) * * *

(1) For performance year 2023. * * *

(2) For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years. For an ACO that reports the three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs in the APP measure set, meeting the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter for all three eCQMs/MIPS CQMs/Medicare CQMs, and administers the CAHPS for MIPS survey (except as specified in § 414.1380(b)(1)(vii)(B) of this subchapter), CMS calculates the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score as the sum of the ACO's MIPS Quality performance category score for all measures in the APP measure set and the ACO's health equity adjustment bonus points calculated in accordance with paragraph (b)(3) of this section. The sum of these values may not exceed 100 percent.

(3) * * *

(ii) * * *

(B) Values of zero for each measure that CMS does not evaluate because the measure is unscored or the ACO does not meet the case minimum or the minimum sample size for the measure.

(iv) * * *

(A) ( 1 ) CMS determines the proportion ranging from zero to one of the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for the performance year that is considered underserved based on the highest of either of the following:

( i ) The proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an Area Deprivation Index (ADI) national percentile rank of at least 85. An ACO's assigned beneficiaries without an available numeric ADI national percentile rank are excluded from the calculation of the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries residing in a census block group with an ADI national percentile rank of at least 85.

( ii ) The proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries who are enrolled in the Medicare Part D low-income subsidy (LIS); or are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid.

( 2 ) CMS calculates the proportions specified in paragraph (b)(3)(iv)(A)( 1 )( ii ) of this section as follows:

( i ) For performance year 2023, the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries who are enrolled in the Medicare Part D LIS or are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid divided by the total number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries' person years.

( ii ) For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, the proportion of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries with any months enrolled in LIS or dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid divided by the total number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries.

(4) * * *

(i) In determining whether the ACO meets the quality performance standard as specified under paragraphs (a)(4)(i)(A), (a)(5)(i)(A)( 1 ), (a)(5)(i)(B), and (a)(7) of this section.

(c) * * *

(3) If CMS determines the ACO meets the requirements of paragraph (c)(1) of this section and the ACO reports quality data via the APP, CMS calculates the ACO's quality score as follows:

(i) For performance years 2021 and 2022, if the ACO reports quality data via the APP and meets data completeness and case minimum requirements, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's quality performance score or the equivalent of the 30th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year.

(ii) For performance year 2023, if the ACO reports quality data via the APP and meets data completeness and case minimum requirements, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 30th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year.

(iii) For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, if the ACO reports quality data via the APP and meets the data completeness requirement at § 414.1340 of this subchapter and receives a MIPS Quality performance category score under § 414.1380(b)(1) of this subchapter, CMS will use the higher of the ACO's health equity adjusted quality performance score or the equivalent of the 40th percentile MIPS Quality performance category score across all MIPS Quality performance category scores, excluding entities/providers eligible for facility-based scoring, for the relevant performance year.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

97. Amend § 425.600 in paragraph (f)(4)(ii) by removing the reference “425.656(d)” and adding in its place the reference “425.656(e)”.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

98. Amend § 425.601 in paragraph (a) introductory text by removing the reference “§ 425.226(a)(1)” and adding in its place the reference “§ 425.400(a)(4)(ii)”.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

99. Amend § 425.611 in paragraph (c)(2)(iii) by removing the reference “§ 425.652(a)(8)(iv)” and adding in its place the reference “§ 425.658(c)(1)(ii)”.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

100. Section 425.630 is amended—

a. By revising paragraphs (b)(2) and (3), (e)(3), (f) introductory text, and (g)(4);

b. In paragraph (h)(1)(i), by removing “or” at the end of the paragraph;

c. In paragraph (h)(1)(ii), by removing “.” at the end of the paragraph, and adding in its place “; or”; and

d. By adding paragraph (h)(1)(iii) and paragraph (i).

The revisions and additions read as follows:

§ 425.630 Option to receive advance investment payments.

(b) * * *

(2) CMS has determined that the ACO is eligible to participate in the Shared Savings Program.

(3) The ACO is inexperienced with performance-based risk Medicare ACO initiatives during its first 2 performance years and participates in the BASIC track's glide path as follows:

(i) For performance year 1, the ACO must participate in Level A of the BASIC track's glide path.

(ii) For performance year 2, the ACO may participate in Level A of the BASIC track's glide path (in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 )) or Level B.

(iii) For performance years 3 through 5, the ACO may participate in Level A of the BASIC track's glide path (in accordance with § 425.600(a)(4)(i)(C)( 3 )), or Levels B through E.

(e) * * *

(3) Duration for spending payments. An ACO may spend an advance investment payment over its entire agreement period. An ACO must repay to CMS any unspent funds remaining at the end of the ACO's agreement period, except if the ACO terminated its current participation agreement under § 425.220 at the end of performance year 2 or later and immediately enters a new agreement period to continue its participation in the Shared Savings Program, the ACO must spend its advance investment payments within 5 performance years of when it first received advance investment payments and repay to CMS any unspent funds remaining at the end of that fifth performance year.

(f) Payment methodology. An ACO receives two types of advance investment payments: a one-time payment of $250,000 and quarterly payments calculated pursuant to the methodology defined in paragraph (f)(2) of this section. CMS notifies in writing each ACO of its determination of the amount of advance investment payment and the notice will inform the ACO of its right to request reconsideration review in accordance with the procedures specified in subpart I of this part. If CMS does not make any advance investment payment, the notice will specify the reason(s) why and inform the ACO of its right to request reconsideration review in accordance with the procedures specified in subpart I of this part.

(g) * * *

(4) If an ACO terminates its participation agreement during the agreement period in which it received an advance investment payment, the ACO must repay all advance investment payments it received, unless the ACO terminated its current participation agreement under § 425.220 at the end of performance year 2 or later during the agreement period in which it received advance investment payments and immediately enters a new agreement period to continue its participation in the program. CMS will provide written notification to the ACO of the amount due and the ACO must pay such amount no later than 90 days after the receipt of such notification.

(h) * * *

(1) * * *

(iii) Voluntarily terminates its participation agreement in accordance with § 425.220(a).

(i) Reporting information on advance investment payments. The ACO must report information on its receipt of and use of advance investment payments, as follows:

(1) The ACO must publicly report information about the ACO's use of advance investment payments for each performance year, in accordance with § 425.308(b)(8).

(2) In a form and manner and by a deadline specified by CMS, the ACO must report to CMS the same information it is required to publicly report under § 425.308(b)(8).

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

101. Amend § 425.650 in paragraph (a) by removing the references “§§ 425.601, 425.602, and 425.603” and adding in their place the references “§§ 425.601, 425.602, 425.603, and 425.659”.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

102. Section 425.652 is amended—

a. In paragraph (a) introductory text, by removing the reference “§ 425.226(a)(1)” and adding in its place the reference “§ 425.400(a)(4)(ii)”;

b. By revising paragraphs (a)(5)(v)(A), (a)(8), (a)(9) introductory text, and (a)(9)(ii);

c. In paragraph (a)(9)(iv), by removing the reference “§ 425.400(a)(4)(ii)” and adding in its place the reference “§ 425.226(a)(1)”;

d. In paragraph (a)(9)(v), by removing the phrase “, or a combination of these two adjustments”;

e. By adding paragraphs (a)(9)(vi) and (b)(2)(ii)(C); and

f. By revising paragraph (b)(2)(iv)(A).

The revisions and additions read as follows:

§ 425.652 Establishing, adjusting, and updating the benchmark for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

(a) * * *

(5) * * *

(v) * * *

(A) Calculating the county-level share of assignable beneficiaries that are assigned to the ACO for each county in the ACO's regional service area. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for BY3 using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

(8) Except as provided in paragraph (a)(8)(iii) of this section, adjusts the historical benchmark based on the ACO's regional service area expenditures (as specified under § 425.656), or for savings generated by the ACO, if any, in the 3 most recent years prior to the start of the agreement period (as specified under § 425.658). CMS does all of the following to determine the adjustment, if any, applied to the historical benchmark:

(i) Computes the regional adjustment in accordance with § 425.656 and the prior savings adjustment in accordance with § 425.658.

(ii) If an ACO is not eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment under § 425.658(b)(3)(i), and the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value as described in § 425.656(d), is positive, the ACO will receive an adjustment to its benchmark equal to the positive regional adjustment amount. The adjustment will be calculated as described in § 425.656(c) and applied separately to the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iii) If an ACO is not eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment under § 425.658(b)(3)(i), and the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value as described in § 425.656(d), is negative or zero, the ACO will not receive an adjustment to its benchmark.

(iv) If an ACO is eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value as described in § 425.656(d), is positive, the ACO will receive an adjustment to its benchmark equal to the higher of the following:

(A) The positive regional adjustment amount. The adjustment will be calculated as described in § 425.656(c) and applied separately to the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(B) The prior savings adjustment. The adjustment will be calculated as described in § 425.658(c) and applied as a flat dollar amount to the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(v) If an ACO is eligible to receive a prior savings adjustment and the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value as described in § 425.656(d), is negative or zero, the ACO will receive an adjustment to its benchmark equal to the prior savings adjustment. The adjustment will be calculated as described in § 425.658(c) and applied as a flat dollar amount to the following populations of beneficiaries: ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(9) For the first performance year during the term of the agreement period, the ACO's benchmark is adjusted for the following, as applicable: For changes in values used in benchmark calculations in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315. For the second and each subsequent performance year during the term of the agreement period, the ACO's benchmark is adjusted for the following, as applicable: For the addition and removal of ACO participants or ACO providers/suppliers in accordance with § 425.118(b), for a change to the ACO's beneficiary assignment methodology selection under § 425.226(a)(1), for a change to the beneficiary assignment methodology specified in subpart E of this part, for a change in the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores under § 425.659, and for changes in values used in benchmark calculations in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315. To adjust the benchmark, CMS does the following:

(ii) Redetermines the regional adjustment amount under § 425.656 according to the ACO's assigned beneficiaries for BY3, and based on the assignable population of beneficiaries identified for BY3 using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

(vi) Redetermines factors based on prospective HCC risk scores calculated for benchmark years by calculating the prospective HCC risk scores using the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology that applies for the calendar year corresponding to the applicable performance year in accordance with § 425.659(b)(1).

(b) * * *

(2) * * *

(ii) * * *

(C) Multiply the growth rate calculated in this paragraph (b)(2)(ii) by a regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor computed as described in § 425.655.

(iv) * * *

(A) Calculating the county-level share of assignable beneficiaries that are assigned to the ACO for each county in the ACO's regional service area. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for the performance year using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

103. Section 425.654 is amended by revising paragraph (a)(1)(i) to read as follows:

§ 425.654 Calculating county expenditures and regional expenditures.

(a) * * *

(1) * * *

(i) Determines average county fee-for-service expenditures based on expenditures for the assignable population of beneficiaries in each county in the ACO's regional service area. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for the relevant benchmark or performance year using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

104. Section 425.655 is added to subpart G to read as follows:

§ 425.655 Calculating the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor.

(a) General. This section describes the methodology for calculating the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor that will be applied to the regional growth rate component of the three-way blend used to update the historical benchmark as described in § 425.652(b) for agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years.

(b) Calculating county risk scores. CMS does all of the following to determine county prospective HCC and demographic risk scores for use in calculating the ACO's regional risk scores:

(1) Determines average county prospective HCC and demographic risk scores for the assignable population of beneficiaries in each county in the ACO's regional service area. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for the relevant benchmark or performance year using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

(2) Makes separate risk score calculations for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(i) ESRD.

(ii) Disabled.

(iii) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iv) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(c) Calculating regional risk scores. CMS calculates an ACO's regional prospective HCC and demographic risk scores by:

(1) Weighting the county-level risk scores determined under paragraph (b) of this section according to the ACO's proportion of assigned beneficiaries in the county, determined by the number of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries in the applicable population (according to Medicare enrollment type) residing in the county in relation to the ACO's total number of assigned beneficiaries in the applicable population (according to Medicare enrollment type) for the relevant benchmark or performance year for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(i) ESRD.

(ii) Disabled.

(iii) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iv) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(2) Aggregating the values determined under paragraph (c)(1) of this section for each population of beneficiaries (according to Medicare enrollment type) across all counties within the ACO's regional service area.

(d) Determining aggregate growth in regional risk scores. CMS determines aggregate growth in regional prospective HCC and demographic risk scores by:

(1) Determining growth in regional prospective HCC and demographic risk scores determined in paragraph (c) of this section (expressed as a ratio of the performance year regional risk score to the BY3 regional risk score) for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(i) ESRD.

(ii) Disabled.

(iii) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iv) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(2) Determines the aggregate growth in regional risk scores by calculating a weighted average of the growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores or demographic risk scores, as applicable, across the populations described in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. When calculating the weighted average growth in prospective HCC risk scores or demographic risk scores, as applicable, the weight applied to the growth in risk scores for each Medicare enrollment type is equal to the product of the ACO's regionally adjusted historical benchmark expenditures for that enrollment type and the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary person years for that enrollment type.

(e) Determining the cap on regional risk score growth. CMS determines the cap on regional prospective HCC risk score growth by:

(1) Computing the sum of the aggregate growth in regional demographic risk scores as determined in paragraph (d)(2) of this section and 3 percentage points.

(2) Calculating the ACO's aggregate market share by calculating the weighted average of the share of assignable beneficiaries in the ACO's regional service area that are assigned to the ACO for the performance year as determined in § 425.652(b)(2)(iv) across the populations described in § 425.652(b)(1). In calculating this weighted average, the weight applied to the share for each Medicare enrollment type is equal to the ACO's performance year assigned beneficiary person years for that enrollment type.

(3) Adding to the sum computed in paragraph (e)(1) of this section an amount equal to the product of:

(i) The ACO's aggregate market share as determined in paragraph (e)(2) of this section.

(ii) The difference between the aggregate growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores as determined in paragraph (d)(2) of this section and the sum determined in paragraph (e)(1) of this section. This difference is subject to a floor of zero.

(f) Determining the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor. CMS determines the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor for each Medicare enrollment type to be applied in calculating the regional growth rate described in § 425.652(b) by comparing the aggregate growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores determined in paragraph (d)(2) of this section and, if applicable, the growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores for individual Medicare enrollment types as determined in paragraph (d)(1) of this section with the cap determined in paragraph (e) of this section.

(1) If the aggregate growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores determined in paragraph (d)(2) of this section does not exceed the cap on regional risk score growth determined in paragraph (e) of this section, CMS will set the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor equal to 1 for each of the following populations of beneficiaries:

(i) ESRD.

(ii) Disabled.

(iii) Aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(iv) Aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.

(2) If the aggregate growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores determined in paragraph (d)(2) of this section exceeds the cap determined in paragraph (e) of this section, CMS will compare the growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores for each Medicare enrollment type as determined in paragraph (d)(1) of this section with the cap on regional risk score growth determined in paragraph (e) of this section.

(i) If the growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores for the enrollment type determined in paragraph (d)(1) of this section does not exceed the cap on regional risk score growth determined in paragraph (e) of this section, CMS will set the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor for that enrollment type equal to 1.

(ii) If the growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores determined in paragraph (d)(1) for the enrollment type exceeds the cap on regional risk score growth determined in paragraph (e) of this section, CMS will set the regional risk score growth cap adjustment factor for that enrollment type equal to the growth in regional prospective HCC risk scores for the enrollment type determined in paragraph (d)(1) of this section divided by the cap on regional risk score growth determined in paragraph (e) of this section.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

105. Section 425.656 is amended—

a. By revising paragraph (b)(3);

b. In paragraph (c)(2), by removing the phrase “paragraph (d) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (e) of this section”;

c. By redesignating paragraphs (d) and (e) as paragraphs (e) and (f), respectively;

d. By adding new paragraph (d);

e. In newly redesignated paragraph (e)(5)(ii), by removing the phrase “paragraph (d)(5)(i) of this section” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraph (e)(5)(i) of this section”;

f. In newly redesignated paragraph (e)(5)(iv), by removing the phrase “paragraphs (d)(1) through (3)” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraphs (e)(1) through (3)”; and

g. In newly redesignated paragraph (f) introductory text, by removing the phrase “paragraphs (b) through (d)” and adding in its place the phrase “paragraphs (b) through (e)”.

The revision and addition read as follows:

§ 425.656 Calculating the regional adjustment to the historical benchmark.

(b) * * *

(3) Adjusts for differences in severity and case mix between the ACO's assigned beneficiary population for BY3 and the assignable population of beneficiaries for the ACO's regional service area for BY3. The assignable population of beneficiaries is identified for BY3 using the assignment window or expanded window for assignment that is consistent with the beneficiary assignment methodology selected by the ACO for the performance year according to § 425.400(a)(4)(ii).

(d) Expression of the regional adjustment as a single value. (1) CMS expresses the regional adjustment as a single value by taking a person-year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment type-specific regional adjustment values determined in paragraph (c) of this section.

(2) CMS uses the regional adjustment expressed as a single value for purposes of determining the adjustment, if any, that will be applied to the benchmark in accordance with § 425.652(a)(8).

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

106. Section 425.658 is amended—

a. In paragraph (b)(3)(i), by removing the sentence “The ACO will receive the regional adjustment to its benchmark as described in § 425.656.”;

b. By revising paragraph (c) and adding paragraphs (d) and (e).

The revision and additions read as follows:

§ 425.658 Calculating the prior savings adjustment to the historical benchmark.

(c) Calculate the per capita prior savings adjustment. (1) If an ACO is eligible for the prior savings adjustment as determined in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, the prior savings adjustment will equal the lesser of the following:

(i) 50 percent of the pro-rated average per capita amount computed in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this section.

(ii) 5 percent of national per capita expenditures for Parts A and B services under the original Medicare fee-for-service program in BY3 for assignable beneficiaries identified for the 12-month calendar year corresponding to BY3 using data from the CMS Office of the Actuary and expressed as a single value by taking a person-year weighted average of the Medicare enrollment type-specific values.

(2) [Reserved]

(d) Applicability of the prior savings adjustment. CMS compares the per capita prior savings adjustment determined in paragraph (c)(1) of this section with the regional adjustment, expressed as a single value as described in § 425.656(d), to determine the adjustment, if any, that will be applied to the ACO's benchmark in accordance with § 425.652(a)(8).

(e) Recalculation of the prior savings adjustment during an agreement period. (1) The ACO's prior savings adjustment is recalculated for changes to the ACO's savings or losses for a performance year used in the prior savings adjustment calculation in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315.

(2) For a new ACO identified as a re-entering ACO, the prior savings adjustment is recalculated for changes to savings or losses for a performance year used in the prior savings adjustment calculation, if the savings or losses of the ACO in which the majority of the new ACO's participants were participating change in accordance with § 425.316(b)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) due to compliance action to address avoidance of at-risk beneficiaries or as a result of issuance of a revised initial determination under § 425.315.

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

107. Section 425.659 is added to subpart G to read as follows:

§ 425.659 Calculating risk scores used in Shared Savings Program benchmark calculations.

(a) General. CMS accounts for differences in severity and case mix of the ACO's assigned beneficiaries and assignable beneficiaries (as defined under § 425.20) in calculations used in establishing, adjusting, and updating the ACO's historical benchmark.

(b) Prospective Hierarchical Condition Category (HCC) risk score calculation. In determining Medicare FFS beneficiary prospective HCC risk scores for a performance year and each benchmark year of the ACO's agreement period, CMS does the following:

(1) CMS specifies the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology used to calculate prospective HCC risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries (as defined under § 425.20) for use in Shared Savings Program calculations as follows:

(i) In calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for a performance year, CMS applies the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology applicable for the corresponding calendar year.

(ii) For agreement periods beginning before January 1, 2024, CMS applies the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology for the calendar year corresponding to the benchmark year in calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for each benchmark year of the agreement period.

(iii) For agreement periods beginning on January 1, 2024, and in subsequent years, CMS applies the CMS-HCC risk adjustment methodology for the calendar year corresponding to the performance year, as specified under paragraph (b)(1)(i) of this section, in calculating risk scores for Medicare FFS beneficiaries for each benchmark year of the agreement period.

(2) CMS does the following to calculate the prospective HCC risk scores identified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section for a benchmark or performance year:

(i) Removes the Medicare Advantage coding intensity adjustment, if applicable.

(ii) Renormalizes prospective HCC risk scores by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries) based on the national assignable FFS population for the relevant benchmark or performance year.

(iii) Calculates the average prospective HCC risk score by Medicare enrollment type (ESRD, disabled, aged/dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, and aged/non-dual eligible Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries).

PART 425 (Title 42 CFR) — amendatory instructions

108. Section 425.702 is amended—

a. In paragraph (c)(1)(ii) introductory text, by removing the phrase “process development” and adding in its place the phrase “protocol development”;

b. By revising paragraph (c)(1)(ii)(A)( 3 ); and

c. By adding paragraph (c)(1)(iii).

The revision and addition read as follows:

§ 425.702 Aggregate reports.

(c) * * *

(1) * * *

(ii) * * *

(A) * * *

( 3 ) Beneficiary identifier.

(iii) For performance year 2024 and subsequent performance years, CMS, upon the ACO's request for the data for purposes of population-based activities relating to improving health or reducing growth in health care costs, protocol development, case management, and care coordination, provides the ACO with information about its fee-for-service population.

(A) The following information is made available to ACOs regarding beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20:

( 1 ) Beneficiary name.

( 2 ) Date of birth.

( 3 ) Beneficiary identifier.

( 4 ) Sex.

(B) Information in the following categories, which represents the minimum data necessary for ACOs to conduct health care operations work, is made available to ACOs regarding beneficiaries eligible for Medicare CQMs as defined at § 425.20:

( 1 ) Demographic data such as enrollment status.

( 2 ) Health status information such as risk profile and chronic condition subgroup.

( 3 ) Utilization rates of Medicare services such as the use of evaluation and management, hospital, emergency, and post-acute services, including the dates and place of service.
